SCHEME/PLAN INFORMATION DOCUMENT
UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan
AND
UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Income Generator Scheme/Plan
(An Open-ended notified tax saving-cum-pension Scheme/Plan with no assured returns)
Name of the Schemes/Plans Riskometer
UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser
Scheme/Plan
(An Open-ended notified tax saving-cum-pension Scheme/Plan
with no assured returns)
This product is suitable for investors who are seeking*:
• Long term wealth creation
• Investment in equity and equity related instruments
(maximum-100%) and debt and money market instruments
UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Income Generator
Scheme/Plan
(An Open-ended notified tax saving-cum-pension Scheme/Plan
with no assured returns)
This product is suitable for investors who are seeking*:
• Regular Income through a conservative management
portfolio
• Investment in debt and money market instruments
(maximum-100%) and equity and equity related instruments
______________________________________________________________________
* Investors should consult their financial advisers if in doubt about whether the product is suitable for them
UTI Mutual Fund
UTI Asset Management Company Limited
UTI Trustee Company Private Limited
Scheme re-opens for continuous sale
New Fund Offer Opens on : New Fund Offer Closes On :
& repurchase not later than
Offer of Units of Rs. 10/- each during New Fund Offer (NFO) and Continuous Offer of Units at NAV based prices
Address of the Mutual Fund, AMC and Trustee Company:
UTI Tower, Gn Block, Bandra Kurla Complex, Bandra (East), Mumbai – 400 051.
The particulars of the Scheme/Plan have been prepared in accordance with the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Mutual Funds) Regulations 1996, (herein after referred to as SEBI (MF) Regulations) as amended till date, and filed with
SEBI, along with a Due Diligence Certificate from the AMC. The units being offered for public subscription have not
been approved or recommended by SEBI nor has SEBI certified the accuracy or adequacy of the Scheme/Plan
Information Document.
The Scheme/Plan Information Document sets forth concisely the information about the Scheme/Plan that a prospective
investor ought to know before investing. Before investing, investors should also ascertain about any further changes to
this Scheme/Plan Information Document after the date of this Document from the Mutual Fund / UTI Financial Centers
(UFCs) / Website / Distributors or Brokers.
The investors are advised to refer to the Statement of Additional Information (SAI) for details of UTI Mutual
Fund, Tax and Legal issues and general information on www.utimf.com
SAI is incorporated by reference (is legally a part of the Scheme/Plan Information Document). For a free copy of
the current SAI, please contact your nearest UTI Financial Centre or log on to our website.
The Scheme/Plan Information Document should be read in conjunction with the SAI and not in isolation.
This Scheme/Plan Information Document is dated ____________ 2016.
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Item No. Contents Page No.
HIGHLIGHTS 3
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Risk Factors 6
B. Requirement of minimum investors in the Scheme/Plan 14
C. Special Considerations 14
D. Definitions 15
E. Due Diligence by the Asset Management Company 19
II. INFORMATION ABOUT THE SCHEME/PLAN
A. Type of the Scheme/Plan 20
B. What is the investment objective of the Scheme/Plan? 20
C. How will the Scheme/Plan allocate its assets? 20
D. Where will the Scheme/Plan invest? 24
E. What are the Investment Strategies? 31
F. Fundamental Attributes 32
G. How will the Scheme/Plan Benchmark its performance? 33
H. Who manages the Scheme/Plan? 34
I. What are the Investment Restrictions? 35
J. How has the Scheme/Plan performed? 37
III. UNITS AND OFFER
A New Fund Offer (NFO) 37
B Ongoing Offer Details 52
C Periodic Disclosures 63
D Computation of NAV 68
IV. FEES AND EXPENSES
A. Annual Scheme/Plan Recurring Expenses 68
B. Load Structure 71
V. RIGHTS OF UNIT HOLDERS 73
VI. PENALTIES, PENDING LITIGATION OR PROCEEDINGS,
FINDINGS OF INSPECTIONS OR INVESTIGATIONS FOR
WHICH ACTION MAY HAVE BEEN TAKEN OR IS IN THE 73
PROCESS OF BEING TAKEN BY ANY REGULATORY
AUTHORITY
2
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
HIGHLIGHTS
About the The proposed Scheme/Plans are being launched as a separate Scheme(s)/Plan(s) under
Scheme/Plan the umbrella, UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund.
Name of the UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund –
Plan Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan Income Generator Scheme/Plan
Type of Plan An Open-ended notified tax saving-cum-pension Scheme/Plan with no assured returns
Investment Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan: The Income Generator Scheme/Plan: The
Objective investment objective of the Scheme/Plan investment objective of the Scheme/Plan is
is to aim for long term wealth creation to aim for regular income through a
for the investors which will be in line conservative management of portfolio
with their retirement goals by investing predominantly invested in debt and money
in a portfolio mix of equity and equity market instruments and balance in equity
related securities. However, there can be and equity related instruments.
no assurance or guarantee that the
investment objective of the Scheme/Plan
will be achieved.
Eligible
Open to resident as well as non-resident Indian adult individuals.
Investors
Plans / The UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan & Income
Options Generator Scheme/Plan offers investors following sub plans :
offered
Regular Sub Plan
Direct Sub Plan
The Sub Plans offers the following options
i Growth Option
ii Dividend Option with Payout and Reinvestment facility
In case no option is indicated in the application form, then the default option will be the
Growth Option & Dividend Reinvestment will be default facility.
Direct Sub Plan:
The Direct Sub Plan (investments not routed through a distributor) shall have a lower
expense ratio excluding distribution expenses, commission etc. and have a separate
NAV. No commission shall be paid/charged from Direct Sub Plan. The terms and
conditions of the Sub plan is in accordance with SEBI Regulations.
If the investor does not mention Direct against the scheme name and the ARN code is
also not provided the default allotment would be made in the Direct Sub Plan.
The Direct and Regular Sub Plans will have a common portfolio.
How to apply: Investors subscribing under Direct Sub Plan will have to indicate
“Direct Sub Plan” against the Plan name in the application form as for example “UTI-
Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan – Direct Sub Plan”.
3
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Treatment of applications under "Direct" / "Regular" Sub Plans:
Broker Code
Plan mentioned by Default Plan to be
Scenario mentioned by the
the investor captured
investor
1 Not mentioned Not mentioned Direct Sub Plan
2 Not mentioned Direct Direct Sub Plan
3 Not mentioned Regular Direct Sub Plan
4 Mentioned Direct Direct Sub Plan
5 Direct Not mentioned Direct Sub Plan
6 Direct Regular Direct Sub Plan
7 Mentioned Regular Regular Sub Plan
8 Sub Mentioned Not mentioned Regular Sub Plan
In cases of wrong/ invalid/ incomplete ARN codes mentioned on the application form,
the application shall be processed under Regular Sub Plan. The AMC shall contact and
obtain the correct ARN code within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the application
form from the investor/ distributor. In case, the correct code is not received within 30
calendar days, the AMC shall reprocess the transaction under Direct Sub Plan from the
date of application without any exit load.
For further details on Direct Sub Plan, please refer to SAI.
Special
Systematic Investment Plan (SIP), 'Step up Facility' & Any Day SIP under SIP facility,
Products /
Systematic Withdrawal Plan (SWP), Dividend Transfer Plan (DTP), Systematic
Facilities
Transfer Investment Plan (STRIP) Facility are offered.
Offered
Liquidity The Scheme/Plan provide redemption / switch out facility on all business days on NAV
based prices after the initial lock in period of 5 years from the date of allotment of units.
Lock-in-
Lock in period of 5 years from the date of allotment of units.
Period
Listing Since the units of the Scheme/Plan are open ended and liquidity is available on business
days on completion of lock-in period of 5 years from the date of allotment, the units are
not proposed to be listed on any stock exchange.
However, the AMC at its sole discretion may list the Units under the Scheme on one or
more stock exchanges at a later date.
Benchmark S&P BSE 100 Index is the benchmark for UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund –
Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan.
CRISIL MIP Blended Index is the benchmark for UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund
– Income Generator Scheme/Plan.
Transparency
/ NAV Declaration of NAV on a daily basis within 5 business days from the date of allotment.
Disclosure
Loads A. Entry Load (as % of NAV): Not Applicable as per SEBI guidelines.
B. Exit Load (as % of NAV): 1% if redeemed/switched out from UTI Retirement
Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan or Income Generator
Scheme/Plan before attainment of 58 years of age.
Nil in case of SWP / Redemption / Switch out/ from UTI Retirement Benefit Pension
Fund–Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan or UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund -
Income Generator Scheme/Plan on or after attainment of 58 years of age or after
completion of 5 year lock in period, whichever is later.
Units issued on reinvestment of dividends shall not be subject to load.
4
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Minimum Minimum initial investment is Rs.5,000/- and in multiples of Rs.500/-. Additional
Application Purchase Amount Rs.1000/- and in the multiple of Rs.500/- without any upper limit.
Amount However, as per section 80 C of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the tax benefit will be
available only upto a maximum amount of Rs.1,50,000/-.
Please refer “Minimum amount for purchase / Redemption / switches”, Page No. 53
for more detail.
Tax Benefits The units under the present Scheme/Plan is offered to the Investors for enabling them to
avail the benefits under clause (xiv) of Sub-section (2) of Section 80C of the Income-tax
Act, 1961. (Maximum deduction of Rs. 1,50,000)
We are seeking an approval from Central Board of Direct Taxes for the Scheme/Plan to
be specified as a pension fund for the purpose of clause (xiv) of sub-section (2) of
section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) for the assessment year 2016-17
and subsequent assessment years.
5
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
I. INTRODUCTION
A. RISK FACTORS
Standard Risk Factors
• Investment in Mutual Fund units involves investment risks such as trading volumes, settlement risk,
liquidity risk, default risk including the possible loss of principal.
• As the price / value / interest rates of the securities in which the Scheme/Plan invests fluctuate, the value of
your investment in the Scheme/Plan may go up or down.
• Past performance of the Sponsors / AMC / Mutual Fund does not guarantee future performance of the
Scheme/Plan.
• UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan or UTI Retirement Benefit
Pension Fund - Income Generator Scheme/Plan does not in any manner indicate either the quality of the
Scheme/Plan or its future prospects and returns.
• The sponsors are not responsible or liable for any loss resulting from the operation of the Scheme/Plan
beyond the initial contribution of Rs.10,000/- made by them towards setting up the Fund.
• The present Scheme/Plan is not a guaranteed or assured return Scheme/Plan.
• Statements / Observations made are subject to the laws of the land as they exist at any relevant point of
time. Growth, appreciation, dividend and income, if any, referred to in this Scheme/Plan Information
Document are subject to the tax laws and other fiscal enactments as they exist from time to time. The
NAVs of the Scheme/Plan may be affected by changes in the general market conditions, factors and forces
affecting capital market, in particular, level of interest rates, various markets related factors and trading
volumes, settlement periods and transfer procedures.
• The Scheme/Plan is not guaranteeing or assuring any dividend. The Scheme/Plan is also not assuring that it
will make periodical dividend distributions, though it has every intention of doing so. All dividend
distributions are subject to the availability of distributable surplus of the Scheme/Plan.
Scheme/Plan Specific Risk Factors
Risk associated with investment in Equities and Equity related instruments
The Scheme/Plan’s investment in Equity and Equity related instruments are exposed to following risks:
• Price Risk : Stock prices may rise or decline based on a number of factors. These could be a combination
of company-specific and system-specific factors. Their impact on different types of stocks may vary. Prices
change due to events that impact entire financial markets or industries (for example, changes in inflation,
consumer demand, supply situation and GDP growth). Company specific factors may include the likes of
success or failure of a new product, mergers, takeovers, earnings announcement and changes in
management, to name a few. Securities owned by the Scheme may offer opportunities for growth because
of high potential earnings growth; they may also involve greater risks than securities that do not have the
same potential.
• Stock Market Volatility : Stock markets are volatile and can decline significantly in response to adverse
issuer, political, regulatory, market, or economic developments. Different parts of the market can react
differently to these developments. The stock-specific volatility may also change over a period of time as
the characteristic of the stock undergoes a change in terms of market cap category.
6
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
• Liquidity Risk : Trading volumes, settlement periods and transfer procedures may restrict the liquidity of
the equity and equity related investments made by the Scheme/Plan which could cause the Scheme/Plan to
miss certain investment opportunities. Different segments of the Indian financial markets have different
settlement periods and such periods may be extended significantly by unforeseen circumstances leading to
delays in receipt of proceeds from sale of securities. The inability of the Scheme/Plan to make intended
securities purchases due to settlement problems could cause the Scheme to miss certain investment
opportunities.
Securities, which are not quoted on the stock exchanges, are inherently illiquid in nature and carry a larger
amount of liquidity risk, in comparison to securities that are listed on exchanges or offer other exit options
to the investor, including a put option. Within the regulatory limits, the Scheme/Plan may choose to invest
in unlisted securities that offer attractive yields. this may however increase the risk of the portfolio.
Investments in equity and equity related securities involve high degree of risks and investors should not
invest in the Scheme/Plan unless they have the capacity to take the risk of losing their investment.
• Dependency Risk : The scheme may invest in stocks and mutual funds and exchange-traded funds linked
to stocks. Equity confers a proportionate share of the ownership of a company. Its value will depend on the
success of the company’s business, income paid to stockholders by way of dividend, the value of the
company’s assets, quality of its corporate governance practice, its attractiveness relative to peers and
general market conditions. The scheme may also invest in convertible securities and warrants. Convertible
securities generally are fixed income securities or preference shares that may be converted into common
stock after a prescribed period.
• Temporary Investment Risk : If the fund manager is of the view that market or economic conditions may
become unfavourable for investors in equities, he may invest a higher proportion of the fund’s assets in
short-term and medium-term fixed income instruments as well as near cash equivalents. This may be a
defensive and temporary strategy. The fund manager may also adopt such a strategy while zeroing in on
appropriate investment opportunities or to maintain liquidity. At times, such investments may lead to lower
returns. In these circumstances, the Scheme may be unable to achieve its investment goal.
• Non - Diversification Risk : The scheme may pursue only a limited degree of diversification. It may invest
a greater proportion of assets in the securities of one issuer (within the limit permitted by regulation) as
compared to a diversified fund. This could have implications for the performance of the scheme. The
Scheme may be more sensitive to economic, business, political or other changes and this may lead to
sizeable fluctuation in the Net Asset Value of the Scheme.
• Asset - Class Risk : Stocks have historically outpaced other asset classes such as gold, fixed deposits and
bonds, to name a few, over the long term in India. Individual stocks prices may, however, tend to rise and
decline in a dramatic manner. Such price movement may be due to company-specific aspects or factors
such as inflation, interest rates and growth rates that affect the securities market in entirety. A slowdown in
growth or a partial or full-blown recession may have a negative impact on prices of most stocks owned by
the Scheme.
Risks Associated With Investments in Debt Securities and Money Market Instruments
The investment in debt securities money market instruments are exposed to following risks :
• Credit Risk : Bonds/Debentures as well as other money market instruments issued by the corporate run the
risk of down grading by the rating agencies and even default as the worst case. Securities issued by
Central/State governments have lesser to zero probability of credit/default risk in view of the sovereign
status of the issuer. For example: One notch downgrade of a AAA rated issuer to AA+ will have an adverse
impact on the price of the security and vice-versa for an upgrade of a AA+ issuer.
• Interest Rate Risk : Bonds/ Central Government securities which are fixed income securities, run price-
risk like any other fixed income security. Generally, when interest rates rise, prices of fixed income
7
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
securities fall and when interest rates drop, the prices increase. The level of interest rates is determined by
the rates at which government raises new money through RBI and the price levels at which the market is
already dealing in existing securities, rate of inflation etc. The extent of fall or rise in the prices is a
function of the prevailing coupon rate, number of days to maturity of a security and the increase or
decrease in the level of interest rates. The prices of Bonds/Central Government securities are also
influenced by the liquidity in the financial system and/or the open market operations (OMO) by RBI.
Pressure on exchange rate of the Rupee may also affect security prices. Such rise and fall in price of
bonds/central government securities in the portfolio of the schemes may influence the NAVs of the
schemes as and when such changes occur. For a fixed term scheme, where the maturity of the debt
securities in the portfolio are in line with the maturity period of the respective schemes, the interest rate risk
may not be there, if the investment is held upto maturity.
• Price Risk : As long as the scheme will be invested, their Net Asset Value (NAV) is exposed to market
fluctuations, and their value can go up as well as down. The portfolio of fixed-income securities that the
Scheme invest in would be exposed to price changes on a day-to-day basis. These price changes may occur
due to instrument-specific factors as well as general macroeconomic conditions. In general, price of fixed-
income securities go up when interest rates fall, and vice versa.
• Liquidity or Marketability Risk : The Indian debt market is such that a large percentage of the total
traded volumes on particular days might be concentrated in a few securities. Traded volumes for particular
securities differ significantly on a daily basis. Consequently, the schemes might have to incur a significant
“impact cost” while transacting large volumes in a particular security. A lower level of liquidity affecting
an individual security (ies) or an entire market may have an adverse bearing on the value of the Scheme’s
asset. This may more importantly affect its ability to sell particular securities with minimal impact cost as
and when necessary to meet requirement of liquidity or to sell stocks in response to triggers such as a
specific economic/corporate event. Trading volumes, settlement periods and transfer procedures may
restrict the liquidity of a few of the investments.
• Risks related to duration : Fixed Income securities of any issuer that has higher duration could be more
risky in terms of price movements relative to those with lower duration. Thus any impact of interest rate
changes would be higher on securities with higher duration irrespective of the status of the issuer of the
security.
• Non - diversification Risk : The scheme may pursue a reasonable degree of diversification adhering to the
SEBI guidelines on limits for investments in a single sector, limits on investments in securities issued by a
single issuer etc. It may invest a greater proportion of assets in the securities of one issuer / single sector
(within the limit permitted by regulation) as compared to a diversified fund. This could have implications
for the performance of the Scheme. The Scheme may be more sensitive to economic, business, political or
other changes and this may lead to sizeable fluctuation in the Net Asset Value of the Scheme.
• Re-investment Risk : The investments made by the Scheme/Plans is subject to reinvestment risk. This risk
refers to the interest rate levels at which cash flows received from the securities in the Scheme/Plans are
reinvested. The additional income from reinvestment is the “interest on interest” component. The risk is
that the rate at which interim cash flows can be reinvested may be lower than that originally assumed.
• Risk from zero coupon securities: The Scheme/Plan may invest in high yield Zero coupon securities for
maximisation of returns. The risk of the Scheme/Plan portfolio may increase to the extent of the exposure
in Zero coupon securities. As zero coupon securities do not provide periodic interest payments to the holder
of the security, these securities are more sensitive to changes in interest rates. Therefore, the interest rate
risk of zero coupon securities is higher.
Risk associated with Investments in Repo of Corporate Debt Securities
In repo transactions, also known as a repo or sale repurchase agreement, securities are sold with the seller
agreeing to buy them back at later date. The difference between the repurchase price and the original sale
price represents the interest earned. A repo is economically similar to a secured loan, with the buyer
8
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
receiving corporate debt securities as collateral to protect against default. The Scheme/Plan will be exposed
to following risk in case, if the Scheme/Plan proposes to invest in repo of corporate debt securities:
• Counterparty Risk: This refers to the inability of the seller to meet the obligation to buy back securities at
the contracted price. The Scheme/Plan will endeavor to manage counterparty risk by dealing only with
counterparties having strong credit profiles assessed through in-house credit analysis or with entities
regulated by SEBI/RBI/IRDA
Collateral Risk: In the event of default by the repo counterparty, the Scheme/Plans have recourse to the
corporate debt securities. Collateral risk arises when the market value of the securities is inadequate to meet
the repo obligations. This risk is mitigated by restricting participation in repo transactions only in AA and
above rated money market and corporate debt securities. In addition, appropriate haircuts are applied on the
market value of the underlying securities to adjust for the illiquidity and interest rate risk on the underlying
instrument.
Risk associated with Investments in Debt & Equity Derivatives
• Valuation Risk : The risk in valuing the Debt & Equity derivative products due to inadequate trading data
with good volumes. Derivatives with longer duration would have higher risk viz a viz the shorter duration
derivatives.
• Mark to Market Risk : The day-to-day potential for an investor to experience losses from fluctuations in
underlying stock prices and derivatives prices.
• Systematic Risk : The risk inherent in the capital market due to macro economic factors like Inflation,
GDP, Global events.
• Liquidity Risk : The risk stemming from the lack of availability of derivatives products across different
maturities and with different risk appetite.
• Implied Volatility : The estimated volatility of an underlying security’s price and derivatives price.
• Interest Rate Risk : The risk stemming from the movement of Interest rates in adverse direction. As with
all the debt securities, changes in the interest rates will affect the valuation of the portfolios.
• Credit Risk : The risk that the counterparty will default on its obligations in a derivative transaction is
relatively low, as there is no exchange of principal amounts. This risk is substantially mitigated where
derivative transactions happen through clearing corporation.
• System Risk : The risk arising due to failure of operational processes followed by the exchanges and OTC
participants for the derivatives trading.
Risk attached with the use of Derivatives
• Interest Rate Swaps (IRSs) and Forward Rate Agreements (FRAs) do also have inherent credit and
settlement risks. However, these risks are substantially less, as they are limited to the interest stream and
not the notional principal amount.
• In an attempt to maximize returns and protect the value of portfolio and of the investors the Scheme/Plan
may have an exposure into derivative products. As and when the Scheme/Plan trades in the derivatives
market there are risk factors and issues concerning the use of derivatives that investors should understand.
Derivative products are specialized instruments that require investment techniques and risk analysis
different from those associated with stocks and bonds. The use of a derivative requires an understanding
not only of the underlying instrument but of the derivative itself. Derivatives require the maintenance of
adequate controls to monitor the transactions entered into, the ability to assess the risk that a derivative
adds to the portfolio and the ability to forecast price or interest rate movements correctly. There is a
9
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
possibility that a loss may be sustained by the portfolio as a result of the failure of another party (usually
referred to as the “counterparty”) to comply with the terms of the derivatives contract. Other risks in using
derivatives include the risk of mispricing or improper valuation of derivatives and the inability of
derivatives to correlate perfectly with underlying assets, rates and indices.
• Derivative products are leveraged instruments and can provide disproportionate gains as well as
disproportionate losses to the investor. Execution of such strategies depends upon the ability of the fund
manager to identify such opportunities. Identification and execution of the strategies to be pursued by the
fund manager involve uncertainty and decision of fund manager may not always be profitable. No
assurance can be given that the fund manager will be able to identify or execute such strategies.
• The risks associated with the use of derivatives are different from or possibly greater than, the risks
associated with investing directly in securities and other traditional investments.
Risk Analysis on underlying asset classes in Securitisation
Securitisation – Features & Investment Strategy
Asset securitisation is a process whereby commercial or consumer credits are packaged and sold in the
form of financial instruments. A typical process of asset securitisation involves sale of specific Receivables
to a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) set up in the form of a trust or a company. The SPV in turn issues
financial instruments (e.g., promissory notes, pass through certificates or other debt instruments) to
investors, such instruments evidencing the beneficial ownership of the investors in the Receivables. The
financial instruments are rated by an independent credit rating agency. An Investor’s Agent is normally
appointed for providing trusteeship services for the transaction.
The Scheme/Plan shall predominantly invest only in those securitisation issuances, which have AAA rating
indicating the highest level of safety from credit risk point of view at the time of making an investment.
Generally available Asset Classes for securitisation in India are:
(i) Commercial Vehicles
(ii) Auto and Two wheeler pools
(iii) Mortgage pools (residential housing loans)
(iv) Personal Loan, credit card and other retail loans
(v) Corporate loans / receivables
The Scheme/Plan may invest in various type of securitisation issuances as given above, including but not
limited to Asset Backed Securitisation, Mortgage Backed Securitisation, Personal Loan Backed
Securitisation, Collateralized Loan Obligation/Collateralized Bond Obligation and so on.
Risk associated with investments in Securitised Papers
Types of Securitised Debt vary and carry different levels and types of risks. Credit Risk on Securitised
Bonds depends upon the Originator and varies depending on whether they are issued with Recourse to
Originator or otherwise. A structure with Recourse will have a lower Credit Risk than a structure without
Recourse. Underlying assets in Securitised Debt may assume different forms and the general types of
receivables include Auto Finance, Credit Cards, Home Loans or any such receipts, Credit risks relating to
these types of receivables depend upon various factors including macro economic factors of these
industries and economies. Specific factors like nature and adequacy of property mortgaged against these
borrowings, nature of loan agreement / mortgage deed in case of Home Loan, adequacy of documentation
in case of Auto Finance and Home Loans, capacity of borrower to meet its obligation on borrowings in
case of Credit Cards and intentions of the borrower influence the risks relating to the asset borrowings
underlying the securitised debt.
Holders of the securitised assets may have low credit risk with diversified retail base on underlying assets
especially when securitised assets are created by high credit rated tranches, risk profiles of Planned
Amortisation Class tranches (PAC), Principal Only Class Tranches (PO) and Interest Only class tranches
10
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(IO) will differ depending upon the interest rate movement and speed of prepayment. Various types of
major risks pertaining to Securitised Paper are as below:
• Liquidity & Price risk : Presently, secondary market for securitised papers is not very liquid. This could
limit the ability of the investor to resell them. Even if a secondary market develops and sales were to take
place, these secondary transactions may be at a discount to the initial issue price due to changes in the
interest rate structure.
• Delinquency and Credit Risk : Securitised transactions are normally backed by pool of receivables and
credit enhancement as stipulated by the rating agency, which differ from issue to issue. The Credit
Enhancement stipulated represents a limited loss cover to the Investors. These Certificates represent an
undivided beneficial interest in the underlying receivables and there is no obligation of either the Issuer or
the Seller or the originator, or the parent or any affiliate of the Seller, Issuer and Originator. No financial
recourse is available to the Certificate Holders against the Investors’ Representative. Delinquencies and
credit losses may cause depletion of the amount available under the Credit Enhancement and thereby the
Investor Payouts may get affected if the amount available in the Credit Enhancement facility is not enough
to cover the shortfall. On persistent default of a Obligor to repay his obligation, the Servicer may repossess
and sell the underlying Asset. However many factors may affect, delay or prevent the repossession of such
Asset or the length of time required to realize the sale proceeds on such sales. In addition, the price at
which such Asset may be sold may be lower than the amount due from that Obligor.
• Prepayment Risk : Asset securitisation is a process whereby commercial or consumer credits are
packaged and sold in the form of financial instruments. Full prepayment of underlying loan contract may
during the tenure of the paper. In the event of prepayments, investors may be exposed to changes in tenor
and reinvestment risk.
Risks associated with Securities Lending
As with other modes of extensions of credit, there are risks inherent to securities lending, including the risk
of failure of the other party, in this case the approved intermediary, to comply with the terms of the
agreement entered into between the lender of securities i.e. the Scheme and the approved intermediary.
Such failure can result in the possible loss of rights to the collateral put up by the borrower of the securities,
the inability of the approved intermediary to return the securities deposited by the lender and the possible
loss of any corporate benefits accruing to the lender from the securities deposited with the approved
intermediary.
Risks associated with investing in Foreign Securities
The Fund may invest in overseas debt / equities / ADR’s / GDR’s with the approval of RBI/SEBI, subject
to such guidelines as may be issued by RBI/SEBI. The net assets, distributions and income of the
scheme/plan may be affected adversely by fluctuations in the value of certain foreign currencies relative to
the Indian Rupee to the extent of investments in these securities. Repatriation of such investment may also
be affected by changes in the regulatory and political environments. The scheme/plan’s NAV may also be
affected by a fluctuation in the general and specific level of interest rates internationally, or the change in
the credit profiles of the issuers.
The Fund may, where necessary, appoint advisor(s) for providing advisory services for such Scheme/plan’s
investments. The appointment of such advisor(s) shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of
SEBI. The fees and expenses would illustratively include, besides the investment management fees,
custody fees and costs, transaction costs and overseas regulatory costs, the fees of appointed advisor(s).
The fees related to these services would be borne by the AMC and would not be charged to the
Scheme/plan.
11
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Risk factor associated with Overseas Investment:
Subject to necessary approvals and within the investment objectives of the Scheme/plan, the Scheme/plan
may invest in overseas markets which carry a risk on account of fluctuations in foreign exchange rates,
nature of securities market of the country concerned, repatriation of capital due to exchange controls and
political circumstances.
• To the extent that the assets of the scheme/plans will be invested in securities denominated in foreign
currencies, the Indian rupee equivalent of the net assets, distributions and income may be adversely
affected by changes in the value of certain foreign currencies relative to the Indian rupee (if Indian rupee
appreciates against these foreign currencies). The repatriation of capital to India may also be hampered by
changes in regulations concerning exchange controls or political circumstances as well as the application to
it of other restrictions on investment. The scheme/plan may have to pay applicable taxes on gains from
such investment.
• As regards foreign equity securities that are traded on exchanges that are not located in India basis of
valuation will depend on the time zone of the respective country. For exchanges located in countries, with
time zone earlier than India, the NAV will be calculated based on the closing price of the foreign equity
security and the prevailing exchange rate on that date. For exchanges located in countries, with time zone
later than India, the NAV will be calculated based on the closing price of the foreign equity security and the
prevailing exchange rate of the previous date.
• Subject to the Regulations, the investments may be in securities which are listed or unlisted, secured or
unsecured, rated or unrated, and acquired through secondary market purchases, RBI auctions, open market
sales conducted by RBI etc., Initial Public Offers (IPOs), other public offers, placements, rights, offers,
negotiated deals, etc
• To avoid duplication of portfolios and to reduce expenses, the Scheme/Plan may invest in any other
Scheme/Plans of the Fund to the extent permitted by the Regulations. In such an event, AMC will not
charge management fees on the amounts of the Scheme/Plans so invested, unless permitted by the
Regulations.
• Additional Risk Factors : The risk associated with underlying stocks remain the same except for the
additional risk of fluctuation in the exchange rate of the Indian Rupee vis-à- vis US Dollar – the currency in
which GDRs / ADRs are denominated. To manage risks associated with the portfolio, foreign currency and
interest rate exposure, the Fund may use / invest in derivatives for efficient portfolio management including
hedging and in accordance with the conditions as may be stipulated by SEBI / RBI. The Fund also hereby
avers that offshore investments shall be made subject to any / all approvals, as well as the conditions
thereof as may be stipulated by SEBI / RBI and provided such investments do not result in expenses to the
fund in excess of the ceiling, if any, on the expenses prescribed by SEBI. The expenses to the fund shall be
limited to the level which, in the opinion of the Fund, is reasonable and consistent with the costs and
expenses attendant to international investing. The Fund may, where necessary, appoint other intermediaries
of repute such as advisors, sub-managers, sub-custodian etc. for managing and administering such
investments. The appointment of such intermediaries shall be in accordance with the applicable
requirements of SEBI and within the permissible ceilings of expenses. The fees and expenses would
illustratively include, besides the investment management fee, custody fees and costs, fees of appointed
overseas advisors and sub-managers, transaction costs, and overseas regulatory costs.
• The NAV of the Scheme/Plan to the extent invested in Debt and Money market securities are likely to be
affected by changes in the prevailing rates of interest and are likely to affect the value of the Scheme/Plan’s
holdings and thus the value of the Scheme/Plan’s Units.
• The AMC may, considering the overall level of risk of the portfolio, invest in lower rated/ unrated
securities offering higher yields. This may increase the risk of the portfolio.
12
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
• Securities which are not quoted on the stock exchanges are inherently illiquid in nature and carry a larger
amount of liquidity risk, in comparison to securities that are listed on the exchanges or offer other exit
options to the investor, including a put option. The AMC may choose to invest in unlisted securities that
offer attractive yields. This may increase the risk of the portfolio.
• While securities that are listed on the stock exchange carry lower liquidity risk, the ability to sell these
investments is limited by the overall trading volume on the stock exchanges. Money market securities,
while fairly liquid, lack a well-developed secondary market, which may restrict the selling ability of the
Scheme/Plan and may lead to the Scheme/Plan incurring losses till the security is finally sold.
• Investment decisions made by the AMC may not always be profitable, even though it is intended to
generate capital appreciation and maximize the returns by actively investing in equity and equity related
securities.
Other Scheme/Plan Specific Risk factors & Risk Mitigation Measures
• The liquidity of the Scheme/Plan’s investments may be inherently restricted by trading volumes, settlement
periods and transfer procedures. In the event of an inordinately large number of redemption requests, or of
a re-structuring of the Scheme/Plan’s investment portfolio, these periods may become significant. Please
read the Sections of this Scheme/Plan Information Document entitled “Special Considerations” and
“Right to Limit Redemptions” there under.
• Although, the objective of the Fund is to generate optimal returns, the objective may or may not be
achieved. The investors may note that if the AMC/Investment Manager is not able to make right decision
regarding the timing of increasing exposure in debt securities in times of falling equity market, it may result
in negative returns. Given the nature of Scheme/Plan, the portfolio turnover ratio may be on the higher side
commensurate with the investment decisions and Asset Allocation of the Scheme/Plan. At times, such
churning of portfolio may lead to losses due to subsequent negative or unfavorable market movements.
• As redemption is allowed only after a Lock-in- Period of five years, the investor will not be able to take
advantage of the opportune moments, if any, during the Lock-in-Period.
• Post necessary approval from CBDT, the tax benefits which shall be available under the Scheme/Plan will
be as per the present taxation laws and will be available only to certain specified categories of investors and
that is subject to fulfillment of the relevant conditions. The information given is included for general
purposes only and is based on advise that the AMC has received regarding the law and the practice that is
currently in force in India and the investors and the Unit Holders should be aware that the relevant fiscal
rules and their interpretation may change. As is the case with any investment, there can be no guarantee
that the tax position or the proposed tax position prevailing at the time of investment in the Scheme/Plan
will endure indefinitely. In view of the individual nature of tax consequences, each Investor/Unit Holder is
advised to consult his/her own professional tax advisor.
Risk Mitigation Measures:
Interest Rate Risk / Reinvestment Risk: The Scheme would manage the interest rate risk & reinvestment
risk by adequately matching the duration of assets in line with the duration of the Scheme.
Credit Risk: Scheme would predominantly invest in highly rated securities where there is an internal
credit comfort which would reduce the probability of credit risk.
Portfolio Quality Risk: A pre approved universe of stocks / issuers based on fundamental research is
maintained to which helps to mitigate the risk of a poor portfolio quality.
Concentration Risk: The Scheme would have modest presence of issuers with reasonable limits to
diversify the portfolio which would mitigate the credit concentration risk as well as sector /stock specific
concentration risk.
13
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Liquidity Risk: Periodical review of the liquidity position of each scrip (Market capitalization, average
volume in the market vis. a vis. Portfolio Holding) to minimize liquidity risk.
Portfolio Risk: By monitoring the return deviation and adequately managing all the above risks namely
interest rate risk, reinvestment risk & credit cum concentration risk the Scheme would mitigate the overall
portfolio risk. Diversification of portfolio will also help to minimize interest rate risk, liquidity risk,
portfolio quality risk and overall risks associated with the portfolio.
Investments in Equity and equity related instruments, carry various risks such as inability to sell securities,
trading volumes and settlement periods, market risk, liquidity risk, default risk, reinvestment risk etc.
Whilst such risks cannot be eliminated, they may be mitigated by diversification and investing in well
researched stocks/equity instruments. In order to mitigate the various risks, the portfolio of the Scheme will
be constructed in accordance with the investment restriction specified under the Regulations which would
help in mitigating certain risks relating to investments in securities market. The diversification of the
portfolio into instruments which are well researched by a robust research team under a strong internal
process would be instrumental in mitigating the risks associated.
Further, the AMC has necessary framework in place for risk mitigation at an enterprise level. The Risk
Management division is an independent division within the organization. Internal limits are defined and
judiciously monitored. Risk indicators on various parameters are computed and are monitored on a regular
basis. There is a Board level Committee, the Risk Management Committee of the Board, which enables a
dedicated focus on risk factors and the relevant risk mitigates.
B. REQUIREMENT OF MINIMUM INVESTORS IN THE SCHEME/PLAN
The Scheme/Plan shall have a minimum of 20 investors and no single investor shall account for more than
25% of the corpus of the Scheme/Plan. The two conditions shall also be complied within each calendar
quarter, on an average basis, as specified by SEBI. If there is a breach of the 25% limit by any investor over
the quarter, a rebalancing period of one month would be allowed and thereafter the investor who is in
breach of the rule shall be given 15 days notice to redeem his exposure over the 25% limit. Failure on the
part of the said investor to redeem his exposure over the 25% limit within the aforesaid 15 days would lead
to automatic redemption by the Mutual Fund on the applicable Net Asset Value on the 15th day of the
notice period. The Fund shall adhere to the requirements prescribed by SEBI from time to time in this
regard.
C. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
• Right to limit Purchase of units and/or Right to limit Redemption of units
The AMC may, in the general interest of the Unit holders of the Scheme under this Scheme Information
Document and keeping in view the unforeseen circumstances / unusual market conditions, limit the total
number of Units which may be redeemed on any Business Day to 5% of the total number of Units then
issued and outstanding under any Scheme / Plan or such other percentage as the AMC may determine.
The AMC may, at its sole discretion in response to unforeseen circumstances or unusual market conditions
including, but not limited to, extreme volatility of the stock, fixed income and money markets, extended
suspension of trading on the stock exchanges, natural calamities, communication breakdowns, internal
system breakdowns, strikes, bandhs, riots or other situations where the AMC, considers that such
suspension is necessary, limit the total number of Units which may be redeemed on any Business Day to
5% of the total number of Units then in issue or such higher percentage as the AMC may determine in any
particular case.
Any Units, which by virtue of these limitations are not redeemed on a particular Business Day, will be
carried forward for redemption to the next Business Day, in the order of receipt. Redemptions so carried
forward will be priced on the basis of the Redemption Price of the Business Day on which redemption is
made. Under such circumstances, to the extent multiple redemption requests are received at the same time
14
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
on a single Business Day, redemption’s will be made on pro-rata basis, based on the size of each
redemption request, the balance amount being carried forward for redemption to the next Business Day(s).
• Suspension of Purchase and Redemption of Units
The purchase and/or redemption of Units may be suspended with prior approval of Trustees and Asset
Management Company giving the details of circumstances and justification for the proposed action shall
also be informed to SEBI in advance, temporarily or indefinitely when any of the following conditions
exist at one/more Designated Investor Service Centre’s:
a) The stock market stops functioning or trading is restricted;
b) Periods of extreme volatility in the stock market, fixed income or money market, which, in the opinion
of the Investment Manager, are prejudicial or detrimental to the interest of the investors;
c) Natural calamity;
d) For any bulk processing like dividend, etc.
e) If banks do not carry-out any of the normal Banking activities at one or more Designated Investor
Service Centers;
f) In the event of breakdown in the means of communication used for the valuation of investments of the
Scheme, without which the value of the securities cannot be accurately calculated;
g) In the event of any force majeure or disaster that affects the normal functioning of the AMC or the
designated investor service centers;
h) SEBI, by order, so directs;
i) AMC also reserves the right at its sole discretion to withdraw sale of Units in the Scheme temporarily
or indefinitely, if the AMC views that increasing the Scheme’s size further may prove detrimental to
the existing unit holders of the Scheme. An order/request to purchase Units is not binding on and may
be rejected by the Trustee, the AMC or their respective agents, unless it has been confirmed in writing
by the AMC or its agents and (or) payment has been received.
D. DEFINITIONS
In this Scheme/Plan unless the context otherwise requires:
1. “Acceptance date” or “date of acceptance” with reference to an application made by an applicant to the
UTI Asset Management Company (UTI AMC) for purchase or redemption of units means the day on
which the UTI Financial Centres (UFCs) / Registrar or the other official points of acceptance (as per the
list attached with this Scheme/Plan Information Document) or notified hereafter, after being satisfied that
such application is complete in all respects, accepts the same;
2. “Accounting Year” of UTI Mutual Fund is from April to March;
3. “Act” means the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, (15 of 1992) as amended from time
to time;
4. “Applicant” means an investor who is eligible to participate in the scheme and who is not a minor and
shall include the alternate applicant mentioned in the application form;
5. “AMFI” means Association of Mutual Funds in India;
6. “Asset Management Company / UTI AMC / AMC / Investment Manager” means the UTI Asset
Management Company Limited incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956, (1 of 1956) [replaced by
The Companies Act, 2013 (No.18 of 2013)] and approved as such by Securities Exchange Board of India
(SEBI) under sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 21 to act as the investment manager to the Scheme/Plans
of UTI Mutual Fund;
15
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
7. “Body Corporate” or “Corporation” includes a company incorporated outside India but does not include
(a) a corporation sole, (b) a co-operative society registered under any law relating to co-operative
societies and (c) any other body corporate (not being a company as defined under Companies Act, 1956
[replaced by The Companies Act, 2013 (No.18 of 2013)] which the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
8. “Book Closure” is a period when the register of unit holders is closed for all transactions viz., purchase /
redemption / changeover / switchover, change in particulars etc. Such Book Closure period will not
exceed 15 days in a year;
9. “Business Day” means a day other than (i) Saturday and Sunday or (ii) a day on which the principal stock
exchange with reference to which the valuation of securities under the Scheme/Plan is done is closed, or
the Reserve Bank of India or banks in Mumbai are closed for business, or (iii) a day on which the UTI
AMC offices in Mumbai remain closed or (iv) a day on which purchase and redemption / changeover /
switchover of unit is suspended by the Trustee or (v) a day on which normal business could not be
transacted due to storm, floods, bandhs, strikes or such other events as the AMC may specify from time to
time;
The AMC reserves the right to declare any day as a Business Day or otherwise at any or all official Points
of Acceptance;
10. "CDSL" means Central Depository Services (India) Ltd.
11. “Custodian” means a person who has been granted a certificate of registration to carry on the business of
custodian under the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Custodian of Securities) Regulations, 1996,
and who may be appointed for rendering custodian services for the Scheme/Plan in accordance with the
Regulations.
12. "Depository" means a body corporate as defined in Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) and includes
National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL) and Central Depository Services Ltd. (CDSL).
13. "Dividend" Income distributed by the Scheme on the Units.
14. “Distributable surplus” means the Gains that has been realised on a marked to market basis and is carried
forward to the balance sheet at market value, arising out of appreciation on investments which is readily
available for distribution to the unit holders as Income.
15. “Eligible Trust” means - (i) a trust created by or in pursuance of the provisions of any law which is for the
time being in force in any State, or (ii) a trust, the properties of which are vested in a treasurer under the
Charitable Endowments Act 1890 (Act 6 of 1890), or (iii) a religious or charitable trust which is
administered or controlled or supervised by or under the provisions of any law, which is for the time
being in force relating to religious or charitable trusts or, (iv) any other trust, being an irrevocable trust,
which has been created for the purpose of or in connection with the endowment of any property or
properties for the benefit or use of the public or any section thereof, or (v) a trust created by a will which
is valid and has become effective, or (vi) any other trust, being an irrevocable trust, which has been
created by an instrument in writing and includes 'depository’ within the meaning of Clause(e) of
Subsection (1) of Section 2 of The Depositories Act, 1996;
16. "Firm, "partner" and "partnership" have the meanings assigned to them in the Indian Partnership Act,
1932 (9 of 1932), but the expression "partner" shall also include any person who being a minor is
admitted to the benefits of the partnership;
17. “Fund Manager” means the manager appointed for the day-to-day management and administration of the
Scheme/Plan;
16
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
18. “Investment Management Agreement or IMA” means the Investment Management Agreement (IMA)
dated December 9, 2002, executed between UTI Trustee Company Private Limited and UTI Asset
Management Company Limited;
19. “Investor Service Centre” such offices as are designated as Investor Service Centre (ISC) by the AMC
from time to time;
20. “Load” is a charge that may be levied as a percentage of NAV at the time of exiting from the
Scheme/Plan;
21. “Lock-in-Period” shall be a period of 5 years from the date of allotment of units under the Plan during
which period the applicant will be required to hold the units and not tender them for redemption;
22. “Mutual Fund” or “Fund” or “UTIMF” means UTI Mutual Fund, a Trust under the Indian Trust Act, 1882
registered with SEBI under registration number MF / 048 / 03 / 01 dated January 14, 2003;
23. “NAV” means Net Asset Value of the Units of the Scheme/Plan calculated in the manner provided in this
Scheme/Plan Information Document and in conformity with the SEBI Regulations as prescribed from
time to time.
24. "New Fund Offer or NFO or New Fund Offer Period" means offer of the units of the UTI-Retirement
Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan and UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund –
Income Generator Scheme/Plan during the New Fund Offer Period.
25. New Fund Offer Period of the Scheme/Plan” Offer of units of the Scheme/Plan during the New Fund
Offer Period of the Scheme/Plan and as determined by the AMC.
26. “Non-Resident Indian (NRI)” shall have the meaning as defined under Foreign Exchange Management
(Deposit) Regulations, 2000 (FEMA Regulation 2000) framed by Reserve Bank of India under Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999). As per FEMA Regulation 2000, “Non-Resident Indian
(NRI)” means a person resident outside India who is a citizen of India or is a person of Indian origin. A
person shall be deemed to be a “person of Indian origin” if he is a citizen of any country other than
Bangladesh or Pakistan and if (a) he at any time held Indian passport; or (b) he or either of his parents or
any of his grandparents was a citizen of India by virtue of the Constitution of India or the Citizenship Act,
1955 (57 of 1955); or (c) the person is a spouse of an Indian citizen or a person referred to in sub-clause
(a) or (b) herein;
27. "NSDL" means the National Securities Depository Ltd.
28. “Number of units deemed to be in issue” means the aggregate of the number of units issued and still
remaining outstanding;
29. “Official points of acceptance” UTI Financial Centers (UFCs), Offices of the Registrars of the
Scheme/Plan and any other authorised center as may be notified by UTI AMC from time to time are the
official points of acceptance of purchase / changeover / switchover and redemption applications of the
Scheme/Plan. The cut off time as mentioned in the Scheme/Plan Information Document will be applicable
at these official points of acceptance. The list of official point of acceptance is attached with this
document.
For purchase / redemption / changeover / switchover of units applications received at any authorized
collection center, which is not an official point of acceptance, the cut off time at the official point of
acceptance alone, will be applicable for determination of NAV.
30. “RBI” means the Reserve Bank of India, constituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
17
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
31. “Record date” the date announced by the fund for any benefits like dividends, bonus etc. The person
holding the units as per the records of UTI AMC / Registrars, on the record date shall be eligible for such
benefits;
32. “Registrar” means a person whose services may be retained by UTI AMC to act as the Registrar under the
Scheme/Plan, from time to time;
33. “Regulations” or “SEBI Regulations” mean the SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996, as amended
from time to time;
34. “Scheme/Plan” means the UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan or
UTI - Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Income Generator Scheme/Plan.
35. “SEBI” means the Securities and Exchange Board of India set up under the Securities and Exchange
Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);
36. “Society” means a society established under the Societies Registration Act of 1860 (21 of 1860) or any
other society established under any State or Central law for the time being in force;
37. “Sponsors” are Bank of Baroda, Punjab National Bank, Life Insurance Corporation of India and State
Bank of India;
38. “Switchover” means transfer of units of one Scheme/Plan of UTI MF to another Scheme/Plan of UTI MF
wherever permissible.
39. “Time” all time referred to in the Scheme/Plan Information Document stands for Indian Standard Time.
40. “Trustee” means UTI Trustee Company Private Limited, a company incorporated under the Companies
Act, 1956 [replaced by The Companies Act, 2013 (No.18 of 2013)] and approved by SEBI to act as the
Trustee to the Scheme/Plans of UTI Mutual Fund.
41. “Trust Deed” means the Trust Deed dated December 9, 2002 of UTI Mutual Fund.
42. “Unit” means the interest of the Unit Holders in a Scheme/Plan, which consists of each unit representing
one undivided share in the assets of a Scheme/Plan.
43. “Unit Capital” means the aggregate of the face value of units issued under the Scheme/Plan and
outstanding for the time being.
44. “Unit holder” means a person holding units in the Scheme/Plan of the Mutual Fund.
45. In this Scheme/Plan Information Document, unless the context otherwise requires, (i) the singular
includes the plural and vice versa, (ii) reference to any gender includes a reference to all other genders,
(iii) heading and bold typeface are only for convenience and shall be ignored for the purposes of
interpretation.
18
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
E. DUE DILIGENCE BY THE ASSET MANAGEMENT COMPANY
Due Diligence Certificate submitted to SEBI for
UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan
&
UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Income Generator Scheme/Plan
It is confirmed that:
i. the Draft Scheme/Plan Information Document forwarded to SEBI is in accordance with the
SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996, and the guidelines and directives issued by SEBI
from time to time except with respect to the following;
ii. all legal requirements connected with the launching of the Scheme/Plan was also the
guidelines, instructions, etc. issued by the Government and any other competent authority in
this behalf, have been duly complied with;
iii. the disclosures made in the Scheme/Plan Information Document are true, fair and adequate to
enable the investors to make a well informed decision regarding investment in the
Scheme/Plan;
iv. the intermediaries named in the Scheme/Plan Information Document and Statement of
Additional Information are registered with SEBI and their registration is valid as on date.
Date:____________, 2016 Vivek Maheshwari
Place: Mumbai Compliance Officer
19
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
II. INFORMATION ABOUT THE SCHEME/PLAN
A. TYPE OF THE SCHEME/PLAN
UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan and UTI-Retirement Benefit
Pension Fund – Income Generator Scheme/Plan are an open ended notified tax savings cum pension
Scheme/Plan with no assured returns.
B. WHAT IS THE INVESTMENT OBJECTIVE OF THE SCHEME/PLAN?
Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan: The investment objective of the Scheme/Plan is to aim for long term
wealth creation for the investors which will be in line with their retirement goals by investing in a
portfolio mix of equity and equity related securities. However, there can be no assurance or guarantee that
the investment objective of the Scheme/Plan will be achieved.
Income Generator Scheme/Plan: The investment objective of the Scheme/Plan is to aim for regular
income through a conservative management of portfolio predominantly invested in debt and money
market instruments and balance in equity and equity related instruments. However, there can be no
assurance or guarantee that the investment objective of the Scheme/Plan will be achieved.
C. HOW WILL THE SCHEME/PLAN ALLOCATE ITS ASSETS?
1. Asset Allocation:
The Funds collected under the Scheme/Plan shall generally be invested consistent with the objective of the
Scheme/Plan in the following manner:
Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan:
Indicative Allocation
Instruments Risk Profile
(% of total assets)
Minimum - 80%
Equity & Equity related instruments High
Maximum- 100%
Debt and Money Market Securities Minimum - 0%
Low to Medium
(including Securitised Debt)* Maximum- 20%
* Investment in Securitised debt, if undertaken, would not exceed 10% of the net assets of the Scheme.
Income Generator Scheme/Plan:
Indicative Allocation
Instruments Risk Profile
(% of total assets)
Debt and Money Market Securities Minimum - 75%
Low to Medium
(including Securitised Debt)* Maximum- 100%
Minimum - 0%
Equity and Equity related securities High
Maximum- 25%
* Investment in Securitised debt, if undertaken, would not exceed 20% of the net assets of the Scheme.
The Scheme/Plan will not engage in Short Selling, Credit Default Swaps.
The scheme may engage in Securities Lending and Repo in Corporate Debt. Gross exposure of the scheme
to repo transactions in corporate debt securities shall not be more than 10% of the net asset scheme or such
other limits as may be permitted by SEBI from time to time . The scheme may engage in Securities
Lending not exceeding 15% of the net assets of the scheme and shall not lend more than 5% of its Net
Assets to a single counterparty or such other limits as may be permitted by SEBI from time to time.
20
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Performance will depend on the Asset Management Company's ability to assess accurately and react to
changing market conditions.
If the Fund Manager decides to invest in ADRs / GDRs issued by Indian / foreign companies and in
foreign Securities in accordance with SEBI Regulations in the Scheme, investments in such instruments
will not exceed 20% of the net assets of the Scheme.
Gross investments in securities under the Scheme which includes equities, equity related
instruments/securities, debt securities, money market instruments and derivatives will not exceed 100% of
the net assets of the Scheme or such other limits as may be permitted by SEBI from time to time.
However, the gross exposure to derivatives in the equity segment shall be restricted to 50% of the net
assets of the Scheme.
The above investment pattern is indicative and may be changed by the Fund Manager for a short term
period on defensive considerations, keeping in view market conditions, market opportunities, applicable
SEBI (MF) Regulations 1996, legislative amendments and other political and economic factors, the
intention being at all times to seek to protect the interests of the Unit Holders. Further in the event of any
deviations below the minimum limits or beyond the maximum limits as specified in the above table and
subject to the notes mentioned herein, the Fund Manager shall - rebalance the portfolio within 30 days
from the date of said deviation. In case the same is not aligned to the above asset allocation pattern within
30 days, justification shall be provided to the Investment Committee of the AMC and reasons for the same
shall be recorded in writing. The Investment Committee shall then decide on the course of action.
There can be no assurance that the investment objective of the Scheme will be realised.
Investment in Money Market Instruments
While no fixed allocation will normally be made for investment in money market instruments like Call
Deposits, Commercial Papers, Treasury Bills etc. the same will be kept to the minimum generally to meet
the liquidity needs of the Scheme/Plan.
UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan and UTI-Retirement Benefit
Pension Fund – Income Generator Scheme/Plan retains the option to alter the asset allocation for short-
term periods on defensive consideration.
The Scheme/Plan primarily debt oriented shall not have sectoral exposure in excess of 25% of the net
assets as per sectoral classification as prescribed by AMFI.
As per the partial modification to SEBI Circular No. CIR/IMD/DF/21/2012 dated September 13, 2012,
SEBI Circular No. CIR/IMD/DF/24/2012 dated November 19, 2012 and SEBI Circular No.
CIR/IMD/DF/05/2014 dated March 24, 2014. The AMCs shall ensure that total exposure of debt
Scheme/Plans of mutual funds in a particular sector (excluding investments in Bank CDs, CBLO, short
term deposits of scheduled commercial banks, G-Secs, T Bills and AAA rated securities issued by Public
Financial Institutions and Public Sector Banks) shall not exceed 25% of the net assets of the Scheme/Plan.
Provided that an additional exposure to financial services sector (over and above the limit of 25%) not
exceeding 5% of the net assets of the Scheme/Plan shall be allowed by way of increase in exposure to
Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) only.
Provided further that the additional exposure to such securities issued by HFCs are rated AA and above
and these HFCs are registered with National Housing Bank (NHB) and the total investment/ exposure in
HFCs shall not exceed 25% of the net assets of the Scheme/Plan
Pending deployment of funds of the Scheme/Plan in securities in terms of the investment objective of the
Scheme/Plan as stated above, the funds of the Scheme/Plan may be invested in short term deposits of
21
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
scheduled commercial banks in accordance with SEBI Circular No SEBI / IMD / Cir No 1 / 91171 /07
dated April 16, 2007.
2. Debt market in India
(i) Debt Instrument Characteristics:
A Debt Instrument is basically an obligation which the borrower has to service periodically and generally
has the following features:
Face Value : Stated value of the paper / Principal Amount
Coupon : Zero, fixed or floating
Frequency : Semi-annual, annual, sometimes quarterly
Maturity : Bullet, staggered
Redemption : FV, premium or discount
Options : Call/Put
Issue Price : Par (FV) or premium or discount
A debt instrument comprises of a unique series of cash flows for each paper, terms of which are decided at
the time of issue. Discounting these cash flows to the present value at various applicable discount rates
(market rates) provides the market price.
(ii) Debt Market Structure
The Indian Debt market comprises of the Money Market and the Long Term Debt Market.
Money market instruments are Commercial Papers (CPs), Certificates of Deposit (CDs), Treasury bills
(T-bills), Repos, Inter-bank Call money deposit, CBLOs etc. They are mostly discounted instruments that
are issued at a discount to face value.
Money market instruments have a tenor of less than one year while debt market instruments typically
have a tenor of more than one year
Long Term Debt market in India comprises mainly of two segments viz., the Government securities
market and the corporate securities market.
Government securities includes central, state and local issues. The main instruments in this market are
Dated securities (Fixed or Floating) and Treasury bills (Discounted Papers). The Central Government
securities are generally issued through auctions on the basis of ‘Uniform price’ method or ‘Multiple price’
method while State Govt. are through on-tap sales.
Corporate debt segment on the other hand includes bonds/debentures issued by private corporates, public
sector units (PSUs) and development financial institutions (DFIs). The debentures are rated by a rating
agency and based on the feedback from the market, the issue is priced accordingly. The bonds issued may
be fixed or floating. The floating rate debt market has emerged as an active market in the rising interest
rate scenario. Benchmarks range from Overnight rates or Treasury benchmarks.
Debt derivatives market comprises mainly of Interest Rate Swaps linked to Overnight benchmarks called
MIBOR (Mumbai Inter Bank Offered Rate) and is an active market. Banks and corporate are major
players here and of late Mutual Funds have also started hedging their exposures through these products.
Securitised Debt Instruments – Asset securitization is a process of transfer of risk whereby commercial
or consumer receivables are pooled packaged and sold in the form of financial instruments. A typical
process of asset securitisation involves sale of specific Receivables to a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) set
up in the form of a trust or a company. The SPV in turn issues financial instruments to investors, which
are rated by an independent credit rating agency. Bank, Corporates, Housing and Finance companies
generally issue securitised instruments. The underlying receivables generally comprise of loans of
Commercial Vehicles, Auto and Two wheeler pools, Mortgage pools (residential housing loans), Personal
22
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Loan, credit card and Corporate receivables. The instrument, which is issued, includes loans or receivables
maturing only after all receivables are realized. However depending on timing of underlying receivables,
the average tenure of the securitized paper gives a better indication of the maturity of the instrument.
(iii) Regulators
The RBI operates both as the monetary authority and the debt manager to the government. In its role as
a monetary authority, the RBI participates in the market through open-market operations as well as
through Liquidity Adjustment facility (LAF) to regulate the money supply. It also regulates the bank
rate and repo rate, and uses these rates as indirect tools for its monetary policy. The RBI as the debt
manager issues the securities at the cheapest possible rate. The SEBI regulates the debt instruments
listed on the stock exchanges.
(iv) Market Participants
Given the large size of the trades, the debt market has remained predominantly a wholesale market.
Primary Dealers
Primary dealers (PDs) act as underwriters in the primary market, and as market makers in the secondary
market.
Brokers
Brokers bring together counterparties and negotiate terms of the trade.
Investors
Banks, Insurance Companies, Mutual Funds are important players in the debt market. Other players are
Trusts, Provident and pension funds.
(v) Types of security issuance and eligible investors:
Issuer Instruments Yields (as on Maturity Investors
03.02.2016)
Central Dated Securities 7.25% - 8.28% 1-30 years Banks, Insurance Co, PFs,
Government MFs, PDs, Individuals, FPI
Central T-Bills 7.25% - 7.30% 364/91 days Banks, Insurance Co, PFs,
Government MFs, PDs, Individuals, FPI
State Dated Securities 8.40% - 8.45% 10 years Banks, Insurance Co, PFs,
Government MFs, PDs, Individuals
PSUs Corporates Bonds 8.25% - 8.48% 5-10 years Banks, Insurance Co, PFs,
MFs, PDs, Individuals, FPI
Corporates Bonds 8.80% - 8.60% 1-10 years Banks, MFs, Corporates,
(AAA rated) Individuals, FPI
Corporates Commercial 8.00% - 9.00% 15 days to 1 yr Banks, MFs, Fin Inst,
Papers Corporates, Individuals, FPIs
Banks Certificates of 7.40% - 8.15% 15 days to 1 yr Banks, Insurance Co, PFs,
Deposit MFs, PDs, Individuals
Banks Bonds 8.40% - 8.50% 10-15 years Banks, Companies, MFs, PDs,
Individuals
(vi) Trading Mechanism
Government Securities and Money Market Instruments
Currently, Government Securities (G-Sec) trades are predominantly routed though NDS-OM which is a
screen based anonymous order matching systems for secondary market trading in G Sec owned by RBI.
Corporate Debt is basically a phone driven market where deals are concluded verbally over recorded
lines. The reporting of trade is done on the NSE Wholesale Debt Market segment.
23
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
D. WHERE WILL THE SCHEME/PLAN INVEST?
1. The corpus of the Scheme can be invested in any (but not exclusively) of the following
instruments.
(i) Indian Equity and equity related securities including convertible bonds and debentures and warrants
carrying the right to obtain equity shares
(ii) Securities created and issued by the Central and State Governments and/or repos/reverse repos in
such Government Securities as may be permitted by RBI (including but not limited to coupon
bearing bonds, zero coupon bonds and treasury bills)
(iii) Securities guaranteed by the Central and State Governments (including but not limited to coupon
bearing bonds, zero coupon bonds and treasury bills)
(iv) Debt securities issued by domestic Government agencies and statutory bodies, which may or may not
carry a Central/State Government guarantee
(v) Corporate debt securities (of both public and private sector undertakings)
(vi) Securities issued by banks (both public and private sector) as permitted by SEBI from time to time
and development financial institutions
(vii) Money market instruments permitted by SEBI, having maturities of up to one year, or in alternative
investment for the call money market.
(viii) Certificate of Deposits (CDs)
(ix) Commercial Papers (CPs)
(x) The non-convertible part of convertible securities
(xi) Any other domestic fixed income securities
(xii) Derivative instruments like Interest Rate Swaps, Forward rate Agreements, Stock/ Index Futures,
Stock/ Index Options and such other derivate instruments permitted by SEBI
(xiii) ADRs/ GDRs issued by Indian or foreign companies
(xiv) Equity of overseas companies listed on recognized stock exchanges overseas
(xv) Initial and follow on public offerings for listing at recognized stock exchanges overseas
(xvi) Foreign debt securities in the countries with fully convertible currencies, short term as well as long
term debt instruments with rating not below investment grade by accredited/registered credit rating
agencies
(xvii) Repos in the form of investment, where the counterparty is rated not below investment grade; repos
should not however, involve any borrowing of funds by mutual funds
(xviii) Government securities where the countries are rated not below investment grade
(xix) Derivatives traded on recognized stock exchanges overseas only for hedging and portfolio balancing
with underlying as securities
24
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(xx) Short term deposits with banks overseas where the issuer is rated not below investment grade
(xxi) Units/securities issued by overseas mutual funds or unit trusts registered with overseas regulators and
investing in (a) aforesaid securities, (b) Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) listed in recognized
stock exchanges overseas or (c) unlisted overseas securities (not exceeding 10% of their net assets)
(xxii) The Scheme Shall engage in securities lending for equity investments, in line with the SEBI (Mutual
Funds) Regulations, 1996, Securities Lending Scheme, 1997, SEBI Circular No MFD/
CIR/01/047/99 dated February 10, 1999, SEBI Circular No. SEBI/IMD/CIR No. 14/ 187175/ 2009
dated December 15, 2009, SEBI Circular No. MRD/ DoP/SE/Dep/Cir-14/2007 dated December 20,
2007 notifying framework for lending securities and such other applicable guidelines as may be
amended from time to time. The Scheme may engage in Securities Lending not exceeding 15% of
the net assets of the Scheme and shall not lend more than 5% of its net assets to a single counterparty
or such other limits as may be permitted by SEBI from time to time.
(xxiii) Investment in overseas securities shall be made in accordance with the requirements stipulated by
SEBI and RBI from time to time.
The aggregate ceiling for overseas investments [as stated in point (i) to (x) above] is US $ 7 bn.
Within the overall limit of US $ 7 bn, mutual funds can make overseas investments subject to a
maximum of US $ 300 mn. per mutual fund.
If the Fund Manager decides to invest in ADRs / GDRs issued by Indian / Foreign Companies and
in foreign Securities in accordance with SEBI Regulations in the Scheme, investments in such
instruments will not exceed 20% of the net assets of the Scheme. The fund manager will consider the
risk/reward ratio of the investments in these instruments. Risks may include fluctuating currency
prices, relevant regulations of exchanges/ countries, financial reporting standards, liquidity and
political instability, among others. At the same time, these securities offer new investment and
portfolio diversification opportunities into multi-market and multi-currency products.
(xxiv) Securitised debt instruments, which are either asset backed or mortgage backed securities.
Investment in securitised will be as per the limits in the asset allocation table of the Scheme, subject
to permissible limits laid under SEBI (MF) Regulations.
2. Participation in Repo in Corporate Debt Securities
The Scheme/Plans shall participate in repo transactions in Corporate Debt Securities within the
following overall framework, as per the guidelines of Securities and Exchange Board of India and
Boards of UTI Trustee Co P Ltd & UTI AMC Ltd.
(A) Gross Exposure Norms
(i) The gross exposure of any Scheme/Plan to ‘corporate bonds repo transactions’ shall not be more than
10% of the net assets of the concerned Scheme/Plan.
(ii) The cumulative gross exposure through ‘corporate bonds repo transactions’ along with equity,
debt and derivatives shall not exceed 100% of the net assets of the concerned Scheme/Plan.
(iii) In addition to investment restrictions specified in SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations 1996, the
counter-party exposure in a Scheme/Plan, considering the investments held in the debt securities and
value of collaterals held through repo transactions (as a lender), shall not be more than 30% in case of
money market instruments (20% in other cases).
(B) Category of the counter-party to be considered for making investment
All entities eligible for transaction in corporate debt repos, as defined by Reserve Bank of India
(RBI) and SEBI, shall be considered for repo transactions.
25
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(C) Credit Rating of Counterparty to be considered for making investment
The Scheme/Plan/s shall carry out repo transactions with only those counterparties, who have a
credit rating of ‘AA- and above’ (Long term rating) or ‘A1+’ (Short term rating).
(D) Tenor of Repo
As a repo seller, the Scheme/Plan/s can borrow for a period not more than six months as per the
existing Regulation 44(2) of the SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996.
As a repo buyer, the Scheme/Plan/s can lend for a maximum period of one year, subject to
provision/s of the Scheme/Plan Information Document (SID).
(E) Tenor and Credit Rating of the Collateral
The Scheme/Plan/s shall participate in repo transactions in Corporate Rs. Bonds rated ‘AA’ and
above (‘A1+’ in respect of money market instruments).
The tenor of the collateral shall not be more than 10 years.
(F) Minimum Haircut
In terms of RBI guidelines, repo transactions shall be subject to the following minimum haircuts:-
Rating of the Security AAA AA+ AA
Minimum Haircut 7.50% 8.50% 10%
The above are minimum stipulated haircuts where the repo period is overnight or where the re-
margining frequency (in case of longer tenor repos) is daily. In all other cases, Fund Manager may
adopt appropriate higher haircuts.
Depending on the market conditions and risk perceptions, the Fund Manager may seek higher haircut
(while lending) or give a higher haircut (while borrowing).
(G) Risk factors and mitigation measures
1) Illiquidity Risk
The repo market for corporate debt securities is over the counter (OTC) and illiquid. Hence, repo
obligations cannot be easily sold to other parties.
Therefore, to mitigate such risks, it has been stipulated that gross exposure to Repo in corporate bonds
would be limited to 10% of net assets of the concerned Scheme/Plan. Further, the tenor of repo would
be taken based on nature and unit holders’ pattern of the Scheme/Plan.
2) Counter-party risk
Credit risk would arise if the counter-party fails to repurchase the security as contracted or if
counterparty fails to return the security or interest received on due date. To mitigate such risks, the
Scheme/Plans shall carry out repo transactions with only those counterparties, which has a credit
rating of ‘A1+’ or ‘AA- and above’. In case of lending of funds as a repo buyer, minimum haircuts on
the value of the collateral security have been stipulated, and we would receive the collateral security in
the Scheme/Plan’s account before the money is lent to the counter-party. Overall, we would have a
limited number of counter-parties, primarily comprising of Mutual Funds, Scheduled Commercial
banks, Financial Institutions and Primary dealers.
26
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Similarly, in the event of the Scheme/Plan being unable to pay back the money to the counterparty as
contracted, the counter-party may hurriedly dispose of the assets (as they have sufficient margin) and
the net proceeds may be refunded to the Scheme/Plan. Thus, the Scheme/Plan may suffer losses in
such cases. Sufficient funds flow management systems are in place to mitigate such risks.
3) Collateral Risk (as a repo buyer)
Collateral risks arise due to fall in the value of the security (change in credit rating and/or interest
rates) against which the money has been lent under the repo arrangement. To mitigate such risks, we
have stipulated the minimum credit rating of the issuer of collateral security (‘AA’ for long-term
instruments / A1+ for money market instruments), maximum duration of the collateral security (10
years) and minimum haircuts on the value of the security. For further details refer to SAI/Addendum
No.7/2014-15 dated 7th July 2014.
3. Participation in Derivative Products
The Scheme(s)/ Plan(s) may take derivatives position based on the opportunities available subject to
the guidelines provided by SEBI from time to time and in line with the overall investment objective of
the Scheme/Plan. The Scheme/Plan will comply with the prescribed disclosure requirements.
Derivative Positions may be taken to hedge the portfolio, rebalance the same or to undertake any other
strategy as permitted under SEBI (MF) Regulations from time to time. Hedging does not mean
maximisation of returns but only reduction of systematic or market risk inherent in the investment.
Derivatives:
A derivative instrument, broadly, is a financial contract whose payoff structure is determined by the
value of an underlying security, index, interest rate etc. Thus a derivative instrument derives its value
from some underlying variable.
Derivatives are further classified into
• Futures
• Options
• Interest Rate Swaps
• Forward Rate Agreements
Futures:
A futures contract is a standardized contract between two parties where one of the parties commits to
sell, and the other to buy, a stipulated quantity of a security at an agreed price on or before a given date
in future.
Options:
An option is a derivative instrument which gives its holder (buyer) the right but not the obligation to
buy or sell the underlying security at the contracted price on or before the specified date. The purchase
of an option requires an up-front payment (premium) to the seller of the option.
There are two basic types of options, call option and put option.
(a) Call option:
A call option gives the buyer of the option the right but not the obligation to buy a given quantity of
the underlying asset, at a given price (strike price), on or before a given future date.
(b) Put option:
A put option gives the buyer of the option the right but not the obligation to sell a given quantity of
the underlying asset, at a given price (strike price), on or before a given future date.
27
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
On expiry of a call option, if the market price of the underlying asset is lower than the strike price
the call would expire unexercised. Likewise, if, on the expiry of a put option, the market price of
the underlying asset is higher than that of the strike price the put option will expire unexercised.
The buyer/holder of an option can make loss of not more than the option premium paid to the
seller/writer but the possible gain is unlimited. On the other hand, the option seller/writer’s
maximum gain is limited to the option premium charged by him from the buyer/ holder but can
make unlimited loss.
Interest Rate Swaps:
All swaps are financial contracts, which involve exchange (swap) of a set of payments owned by one
party for another set of payments owned by another party, usually through an intermediary (market
maker). An IRS can be defined as a contract between two parties (Counter Parties) to exchange, on
particular dates in the future, one series of cash flows, (fixed interest) for another series of cashflows
(variable or floating interest) in the same currency and on the same principal for an agreed period of
time. The exchange of cashflows need not occur on the same date. It may be noted that in such hedged
positions (fixed v/s floating or vice versa), both legs of the transactions have interest rate volatility as
underlying. Debt derivatives are as of now customised over the counter products and there is no
guarantee that these products will be available on tap. The provision for trading in derivatives is an
enabling provision and it is not binding on the Scheme/Plan’s to undertake trading on a day to day
basis.
Forward Rate Agreement (FRA) :
A FRA is an agreement between two counter parties to pay or to receive the difference between an
agreed fixed rate (the FRA rate) and the interest rate prevailing on a stipulated future date, based on a
notional amount, for an agreed period. In short, in a FRA, interest rate is fixed now for a future period.
The special feature of FRAs is that the only payment is the difference between the FRA rate and the
Reference rate and hence are single settlement contracts. As in the case of IRS, notional amounts are
not exchanged.
Derivatives can be traded over the exchange or can be structured between two counter-parties. Those
transacted over the exchange are called Exchange Traded derivatives whereas the other category is
referred to as OTC (Over the Counter) derivatives.
Some of the differences of these two derivative categories are as under :
Exchange traded derivatives : These are quoted on the exchanges like any other traded asset class.
The most common amongst these are the Index Futures, Index Options, Stock Futures and Options on
individual equities / securities. The basic form of the futures contract is similar to that of the forward
contract, a futures contract obligates its owner to purchase a specified asset at a specified exercise
price on the contract maturity date. Futures are cash-settled and are traded only in organised
exchanges. Exchange traded derivatives are standardised in terms of amount and delivery date.
Standardisation and transparency generally ensures a liquid market together with narrower spreads. On
the other hand, for delivery dates far in the future, there may be insufficient liquidity in the futures
market whereas an OTC price may be available.
OTC derivatives : OTC derivatives require the two parties engaging in a derivatives transaction to
come together through a process of negotiation. It is a derivative that is customised in terms of
structure, amount, tenor, underlying assets, collateral etc. Some of the common examples are interest
rate and currency swaps, Forward Rate Agreements (FRAs) etc.
Position Limit in Derivatives
The position limits for trading in derivatives by Mutual Funds specified by SEBI vide SEBI Circular
No. DNPD/Cir-29/2005 dated September 14, 2005, SEBI Circular No. DNPD/Cir -30/2006 dated
28
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
January 20, 2006 and SEBI Circular No. SEBI/DNPD/Cir-31/2006 dated September 22, 2006 are as
follows:
i) Position limit for Mutual Funds in index options contracts
a. The Mutual Fund position limit in all index options contracts on a particular underlying index shall
be Rs. 500 crores or 15% of the total open interest of the market in index options, whichever is
higher, per Stock Exchange.
b. This limit would be applicable on open positions in all options contracts on a particular underlying
index.
ii) Position limit for Mutual Funds in index futures contracts
a. The Mutual Fund position limit in all index futures contracts on a particular underlying index shall
be Rs. 500 crore or 15% of the total open interest of the market in index futures, whichever is
higher, per Stock Exchange.
b. This limit would be applicable on open positions in all futures contracts on a particular underlying.
(iii) Additional position limit for hedging
In addition to the position limits at point (i) and (ii) above, Mutual Funds may take exposure in
equity index derivatives
subject to the following limits :
a. Short positions in index derivatives (short futures, short calls and long puts) shall not exceed (in
notional value) the Mutual Fund's holding of stocks.
b. Long positions in index derivatives (long futures, long calls and short puts) shall not exceed (in
notional value) the Mutual Fund's holding of cash, government securities, T-Bills and similar
instruments.
(iv) Position limit for Mutual Funds for stock based derivative contracts
The Mutual Fund position limit in a derivative contract on a particular underlying stock, i.e. stock
option contracts and stock futures contracts will be as follows :-
a. For stocks having applicable market-wide position limit (MWPL) of Rs. 500 crores or more, the
combined futures and options position limit shall be 20% of applicable MWPL or Rs. 300 crores,
whichever is lower and within which stock futures position cannot exceed 10% of applicable
MWPL or Rs. 150 crores, whichever is lower.
b. For stocks having applicable market-wide position limit (MWPL) less than Rs. 500 crores, the
combined futures and options position limit would be 20% of applicable MWPL and futures
position cannot exceed 20% of applicable MWPL or Rs. 50 crore whichever is lower.
(v) Position limit for each scheme of a Mutual Fund
The scheme-wise position limit requirements shall be :
a. For stock option and stock futures contracts, the gross open position across all derivative contracts
on a particular underlying stock of a scheme of a mutual fund shall not exceed the higher of:
1% of the free float market capitalization (in terms of number of shares). or
5% of the open interest in the derivative contracts on a particular underlying stock (in terms of
number of contracts).
29
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
b. This position limits shall be applicable on the combined position in all derivative contracts on an
underlying stock at a Stock Exchange.
c. For index based contracts, Mutual Funds shall disclose the total open interest held by its scheme or
all schemes put together in a particular underlying index, if such open interest
equals to or exceeds 15% of the open interest of all derivative contracts on that underlying index.
Some of the derivative techniques/ strategies that may be used are:-
(i) The Scheme/Plan will use hedging techniques including dealing in derivative products - like futures
and options, warrants, interest rate swaps (IRS), forward rate agreement (FRA) as may be permissible
under SEBI (MFs) Regulations.
(ii) The Scheme/Plan intends to use derivatives only for the purpose of hedging and/or re-balancing of the
portfolio against any anticipated move in the equity and debt markets. A hedge is primarily designed
to offset a loss on a portfolio with a gain in the hedge position.
(iii) The Fund manager may use various strategies for trading in derivatives with a view to enhancing
returns and taking cover against possible fluctuations in the market. One of the strategies could be to
use index futures with a view to increasing/ decreasing the overall level of investment in equities.
(iv) The Fund Manager may sell the index forward by taking a short position in index futures to save on
the cost of outflow of funds or in the event of negative view on the market.
(v) The Schemes/Plans shall have a maximum derivatives net position of 25% of the portfolio, i.e. net
assets, including cash. Within this, the restriction on asset allocation would apply to derivatives
position as well. This means that the maximum permissible derivatives position would be split in the
same ratio as the asset allocation specified in the Scheme/Plan Information Document.
As per the current norms of UTI AMC, the value of derivative contracts outstanding at any point of
time will be limited to 25% of the net assets of the Scheme/Plan at the time of investment. UTI AMC
may in future revise the limits within the SEBI (MFs) Regulations in keeping with the investment
objective of the Scheme/Plan. Such derivative position will comply with overall limits and norms of
SEBI Circular No Cir / IMD / DF / 11 / 2010 dated August 18, 2010, DNPD/CIR-29/2005 dated
September 14, 2005, SEBI/DNPD/Cir-31/2006 dated September 22, 2006 and DNPD/CIR-31/2006
dated January 20, 2006.
4. Exposure limits for trading in derivatives by Mutual Funds as per SEBI Circular No.
Cir/IMD/DF/11/2010 dated 18th August 2010:
a. The cumulative gross exposure through equity, debt and derivative positions should not exceed 100%
of the net assets of the Scheme/Plan.
b. Mutual Funds shall not write options or purchase instruments with embedded written options.
c. The total exposure related to option premium paid must not exceed 20% of the net assets of the
Scheme/Plan.
d. Cash or cash equivalents with residual maturity of less than 91 days may be treated as not creating any
exposure.
e. Exposure due to hedging positions may not be included in the above mentioned limits subject to the
following:-
(i) Hedging positions are the derivative positions that reduce possible losses on an existing position in
securities and till the existing position remains.
30
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(ii) Hedging positions cannot be taken for existing derivative positions. Exposure due to such
positions shall have to be added and treated under limits mentioned in Point a.
(iii) Any derivative instrument used to hedge has the same underlying security as the existing position
being hedged.
(iv) The quantity of underlying associated with the derivative position taken for hedging purposes does
not exceed the quantity of the existing position against which hedge has been taken.
f. Mutual Funds may enter into plain vanilla interest rate swaps for hedging purposes. The counter party
in such transactions has to be an entity recognized as a market maker by RBI. Further, the value of the
notional principal in such cases must not exceed the value of respective existing assets being hedged
by the Scheme/Plan. Exposure to a single counterparty in such transactions should not exceed 10% of
the net assets of the Scheme/Plan.
g. Exposure due to derivative positions taken for hedging purposes in excess of the underlying position
against which the hedging position has been taken, shall be treated under the limits mentioned in point
a.
Definition of Exposure in case of Derivative Positions
Each position taken in derivatives shall have an associated exposure as defined under. Exposure is the
maximum possible loss that may occur on a position. However, certain derivative positions may
theoretically have unlimited possible loss. Exposure in derivative positions shall be computed as
follows:
Position Exposure
Long Future Futures Price * Lot Size * Number of Contracts
Short Future Futures Price * Lot Size * Number of Contracts
Option bought Option Premium Paid * Lot Size * Number of Contracts.
The proceeds collected during the NFO shall be used only on or after the closure of the NFO
period.
The AMC retains the right to enter into such derivative transactions as may be permitted by the
Regulations from time to time. For risks associated with investments in derivatives investors are
requested to refer to Risk Factors of this Scheme/Plan Information Document.
5. Investment by these Schemes in any other Schemes of UTI AMC
Investment by these in other Mutual Fund schemes will be in accordance with Regulation 44(1),
Seventh Schedule of the SEBI (MFs) Regulations as under: A scheme may invest in another scheme
under the same asset management company or any other mutual fund without charging any fees,
provided that aggregate inter scheme investment made by all schemes under the same management or
in schemes under the management of any other asset management company shall not exceed 5% of the
net asset value of the mutual fund. Such investment will be consistent with the investment objective of
the schemes. No investment management fees will be charged by the AMC on such investment.
E. WHAT ARE THE INVESTMENT STRATEGIES?
1. UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan
The Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan, under normal market conditions, will invest in net assets primarily
in Equity and equity related instruments and balance in fixed income securities, money market instruments
and cash equivalents.
31
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
For investments primarily in equity and equity related securities, the Wealth Creation Scheme would aim
to provide long term capital growth by investing in a well diversified portfolio of equity and equity related
securities.
The portfolio manager proposes to invest in equity and equity related instruments of companies with
greater emphasis on individual company metrics driven by in-depth research techniques and employing
the full potential of the research team at the AMC.
The overlying investment philosophy would be a combination of top down and bottom up approach
wherein the objective is to identify and invest in companies that exhibit strong and sustainable growth and
are valued at prices which are at a discount or in short do not reflect the growth potential.
2. UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Income Generator Scheme/Plan
The Income Generator Scheme, under normal market conditions, will invest in net assets primarily in Debt
and Money market instruments. The Scheme will retain the flexibility to invest across all the debt and
money market instruments of various maturities. The AMC will strive to assess risk of the potential
investment in terms of credit risk, interest rate risk and liquidity risk. The AMC would manage the
investments of the Scheme on a dynamic basis to exploit emerging opportunities in the investment
universe and manage risks at all points in time. The AMC will also invest the net assets of the Scheme in
Equity and Equity related instruments. This Scheme seeks to generate steady long term returns with
relatively low levels of risk.
Portfolio Turnover Policy (for the above mentioned both the Schemes)
Portfolio Turnover is defined as the least of purchase or sales as a percentage of average size of a fund
during any specified period of time. As sales and purchases of securities can be made on daily basis, it
would be difficult to estimate with reasonable level of accuracy the likely turnover in portfolios. There
could be instances of churning of portfolio to take advantage of trading opportunity existing in the market.
But it would be difficult to set the target for the portfolio turnover as it would be a function of purchases,
general market conditions, trading opportunities, creation of liquidity to meet income distribution etc. The
portfolio turnover shall be targeted so as to have return maximization for the Unit Holders. At the same
time, expenses such as brokerage and transaction cost shall be kept at low level so that it does not affect
the earnings of the Scheme/Plan.
F. FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTES
Following are the Fundamental Attributes of the Scheme/Plan, in terms of Regulation 18(15A) of the
SEBI (MF) Regulations:
(i) Type of Scheme/Plan
UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan and UTI-Retirement Benefit
Pension Fund – Income Generator Scheme/Plan are an open ended notified tax savings cum pension
Scheme/Plan with no assured returns.
(ii) Investment objective
Main Objective - as given in Clause II B
Investment pattern- The tentative Equity/Debt/Money Market portfolio break-up with minimum and
maximum asset allocation, while retaining the option to alter the asset allocation for a short term period on
defensive considerations – as given in Clause II C (1)
32
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(iii) Terms of issue
• Liquidity provision of redemption: Only provisions relating to redemption as given in the SID.
• Aggregate Expense and Fees [as given in clause IV (A) (2) to (3)] charged to the Scheme/Plan.
In accordance with Regulation 18(15A) of the SEBI (MF) Regulations, the Trustee shall ensure that no
change in the fundamental attributes of the Scheme/Plan(s) and the Plan(s) / Option(s) there under or the
trust or fees and expenses payable or any other change which would modify the Scheme/Plan(s) and
Plan(s) / Option(s) there under and affect the interest of the Unit Holders, is carried out unless -
(i) A written communication about the proposed change is sent to each unit holder and an advertisement
is given in one English daily newspaper having nationwide circulation as well as in a newspaper
published in the language of the region where the Head Office of the Mutual Fund is situated; and
(ii) The unit holders are given an option for a period of 30 days to exit at the prevailing Net Asset Value
without any exit load.
G. HOW WILL THE SCHEME/PLAN BENCHMARK ITS PERFORMANCE ?
Scheme/Plan Benchmark Index & Justification
Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan: S&P BSE 100 Index. Considering the
investment in the fund made in equity /equity
related securities with the objective of
achieving long term wealth creation, we
propose S&P BSE 100 Index as a benchmark
since majority of the stocks relate to the broader
investment philosophy of the fund which is to
invest in stocks with potential for future growth
and good track record.
Income Generator Scheme/Plan: CRISIL MIP Blended Index. Considering the
investment of the fund predominantly in Debt
and Money market securities and balance in
equity and equity related instruments, we
propose CRISIL MIP Blended Index as a
benchmark since it comprises of NIFTY and
Composite Bond fund index, which covers
instruments across all maturities and credit
rating in which Scheme/Plan is expected to
invest.
The Trustee reserves the right to change the benchmark for evaluation of performance of the Scheme from
time to time in conformity with the investment objectives and appropriateness of the benchmark subject to
SEBI Regulations, and other prevailing guidelines, if any.
33
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
H. WHO MANAGES THE SCHEME/PLAN?
Amandeep Chopra (Debt Portfolio) & V Srivasta (Equity Portfolio) are the fund managers of UTI-
Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan and UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension
Fund – Income Generator Scheme/Plan
Shri Ritesh Rathod is the dedicated Fund Manager for investment in ADRs / GDRs / Foreign Securities
Age Name Qualifications Experience Other Scheme/Plans Managed
(in yrs)
44 Amandeep BSc., MBA He has over 25 years of total UTI-Bond Fund;
Chopra experience, with 21years in UTI-Childrens Career Balanced
Investment Management, Plan (Debt Portfolio);
having worked in the areas of UTI-CRTS (Debt Portfolio);
Investment Research and Funds UTI-Dynamic Bond Fund;
Management. Prior to erstwhile UTI-Gilt Advantage Fund;
Unit Trust of India, he has UTI-G-Sec STP;
worked as Production UTI-Liquid Cash Plan;
Coordinator with Aaina Exports UTI-Mahila Unit Scheme/Plan
Ltd. from May, 1990 to January (Debt Portfolio);
1991, as Quality Control UTI-Medium Term Fund*;
Inspector with Stenay Ltd. from UTI-MIS Advantage Plan (Debt
February, 1991 to August, Portfolio);
1992. UTI-Money Market Fund;
UTI-Monthly Income Scheme/Plan
(Debt Portfolio);
UTI-ULIP (Debt Portfolio).
40 V Srivasta B.Com., CA, He has been with UTI AMC UTI Balanced Fund,
ICMA,PGDM since 2002. Prior to joining UTI UTI-Capital Protection Oriented
AMC, he has worked with Scheme/Plans (Equity Portfolio),
Ford, Rhodes Parks & Co., UTI-Dual Advantage Fixed Term
Chartered Accountants for 3 Funds (Equity Portfolio),
years and as Officer-Audit in UTI-Monthly Income Scheme/Plan
Madras Cements Ltd. He (UTI-MIS) (Equity Portfolio);
started in UTI AMC in the UTI-Unit Scheme/Plan for
Department of securities Charitable & Religious Trusts &
research covering varied sectors Registered Societies (UTI-CRTS)
such as Information (Equity Portfolio).
Technology, Capital goods and
metals. He was promoted as Offshore Funds:-
fund manager offshore in India Fund 1986,
December 2005 after a three India Pharma &
year stint in the DOSR. He was UTI India Debt Opportunities Fund,
given additional responsibilities
of equity portion of hybrid Offshore Funds Advisory:-
funds in October 2009. He Milltrust India Fund &
reports to the Head - Equities Spectrum India Fund.
for both the domestic hybrid
equity and offshore equity
Scheme/Plans.
34 Ritesh B.Com., Joined UTI AMC Ltd. on D e d i c a ted fund manager for
Rathod MBA 05-11-2006 as Research investment in ADRs/GDRs/Foreign
(Finance), Analyst in Dept. of Securities securities of all domestic
CFA Research. Presently he is also Scheme/Plans launched or to be
Fund Manager for handling launched by the UTI Mutual Fund.
Overseas Investments.
* alongwith Ritesh Nambiar
34
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
I. WHAT ARE THE INVESTMENT RESTRICTIONS?
Subject to SEBI (MFs) Regulations, guidelines on investment from time to time:
(a) The Scheme/Plan shall not invest more than 10% of its NAV in debt instruments comprising money
market instruments and non - money market instruments issued by a single issuer which are rated not
below investment grade by a credit rating agency authorised to carry out such activity under SEBI. Such
investment limit may be extended to 12% of the NAV of Scheme/Plan with the prior approval of the
Board of Directors of UTI Trustee Company and UTI AMC. Provided that such limit shall not be
applicable for investments in government securities, treasury bills and collateralized borrowing and
lending obligations.
Provided further that investments within such limits can be made in mortgaged backed securitised debt,
which is rated not below investment grade by a credit rating agency registered with SEBI.
(b) The Scheme/Plan shall not invest more than 10% of its NAV in unrated debt issued by a single issuer and
the total investment in such instruments shall not exceed 25% of the NAV of the Scheme/Plan. All such
investments shall be made with the prior approval of the Board of Directors of UTI Trustee Company and
UTI AMC.
(c) Debentures, irrespective of any residual maturity period (above or below one year), shall attract the
investment restrictions as applicable for debt instruments. It is further clarified that the investment limits
are applicable to all debt securities, which are issued by public bodies/ institutions such as electricity
boards, municipal corporations, state transport corporations etc. guaranteed by either state or central
government. Government securities issued by Central/State government or on its behalf by RBI are
exempt from the above investment limits.
(d) The Scheme/Plan primarily debt oriented shall not have sectoral exposure in excess of 25% of the net
assets as per sectoral classification as prescribed by AMFI.
As per the partial modification to SEBI Circular No. CIR/IMD/DF/21/2012 dated September 13, 2012,
SEBI Circular No. CIR/IMD/DF/24/2012 dated November 19, 2012 and SEBI Circular No.
CIR/IMD/DF/05/2014 dated March 24, 2014. The AMCs shall ensure that total exposure of debt
Scheme/Plans of mutual funds in a particular sector (excluding investments in Bank CDs, CBLO, short
term deposits of scheduled commercial banks, G-Secs, T Bills and AAA rated securities issued by Public
Financial Institutions and Public Sector Banks) shall not exceed 25% of the net assets of the Scheme/Plan.
Provided that an additional exposure to financial services sector (over and above the limit of 25%) not
exceeding 5% of the net assets of the Scheme/Plan shall be allowed by way of increase in exposure to
Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) only.
Provided further that the additional exposure to such securities issued by HFCs are rated AA and above
and these HFCs are registered with National Housing Bank (NHB) and the total investment/ exposure in
HFCs shall not exceed 25% of the net assets of the Scheme/Plan
(e) Pending deployment of funds of the Scheme/Plan in securities in accordance with the investment
objective, as stated above, the Scheme/Plan may invest the funds in short term deposits of scheduled
commercial banks in accordance with SEBI Circular No SEBI / IMD / Cir No 1 / 91171 /07 dated April
16, 2007.
(f) No term loans will be advanced by this Scheme/Plan for any purpose as per SEBI regulation 44(3) of
SEBI (Mutual Fund) Regulations 1996.
(g) UTI Mutual Fund shall, get the securities purchased by a Scheme/Plan transferred in the name of the
Scheme/Plan, whenever investments are intended to be of long term nature.
(h) The Scheme/Plan shall not make any investment in any fund of fund Scheme/Plan.
35
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(i) UTI Mutual Fund shall buy and sell securities on the basis of deliveries and shall in all cases of purchases,
take delivery of relative securities and in all cases of sale, deliver the securities and shall in no case put
itself in a position whereby it has to make short sale or carry forward transaction unless allowed by SEBI.
However, the Scheme/Plan may also enter into derivatives transactions as may be permissible under the
guidelines issued by SEBI.
Provided further that sale of government security already contracted for purchase shall be permitted in
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India in this regard.
(j) The Mutual Fund under all its Scheme/Plans taken together will not own more than 10% of any
Company’s paid up capital carrying voting rights.
(k) Transfers of investments from one scheme to another scheme in the same mutual fund shall be allowed
only if,—
(i) such transfers are done at the prevailing market price for quoted instruments on spot basis.
(ii) the securities so transferred shall be in conformity with the investment objective of the scheme to
which such transfer has been made.
(l) (i) The Scheme/Plan will participate in the securities lending program, in accordance with the terms of
securities lending Scheme/Plan announced by SEBI. The activity shall be carried out through
approved intermediary.
(ii) The maximum exposure of the Scheme/Plan to a single intermediary in the securities lending
program at any point of time would be 10% of the market value of the security class of the
Scheme/Plan or such limit as may be specified by SEBI.
(iii) If mutual funds are permitted to borrow securities the Scheme/Plan may in appropriate circumstances
borrow securities in accordance with SEBI guidelines in that regard.
(m)The Scheme/Plan shall not make any investment in any unlisted security of an associate or group company
of sponsors; or any security issued by way of private placement by an associate or group company of
sponsors; or the listed securities of group companies of sponsors which is in excess of 25% of the net
assets.
(n) Investment in non-publicly offered debt: Depending upon the available yield the Scheme/Plan may invest
in non-publicly offered debt securities to the extent to which such investment can be made by the
Scheme/Plan.
(o) Based upon the liquidity needs, the Scheme/Plan may invest in Government of India Securities without
any restriction on the extent to which such investment can be made by the Scheme/Plan.
(p) Investment in the equity shares or equity related instruments of any company shall not exceed more than
10% of the NAV of the Scheme/Plan at the time of investment.
(q) The Scheme/Plan shall not invest more than 5% of its NAV in the unlisted equity shares or equity related
instruments.
(r) The aggregate value of “illiquid securities” of Scheme/Plan, which are defined by SEBI as non traded,
thinly traded and unlisted equity shares, shall not exceed 15% of the total assets of the Scheme/Plan and
any illiquid securities held above 15% of the total assets shall be assigned zero value.
The proposed aggregate holding of assets considered “illiquid”, including debt securities (for which there
is no active established market), could be more than 10% of the value of the net assets of the Scheme/Plan.
In the normal course of business, the Scheme/Plan would be able to make payment of redemption
proceeds within 10 business days, as it would have sufficient exposure to liquid assets. In case of the need
for exiting from such illiquid debt instruments in a short period time, the NAV of the Scheme/Plan could
be impacted adversely.
36
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(s) Investment by this Scheme/Plan in other Mutual Fund Scheme/Plans will be in accordance with
Regulation 44(1), Seventh Schedule of the SEBI (MFs) Regulations as under:
A Scheme/Plan may invest in another Scheme/Plan under the same Asset Management Company or any
other mutual fund without charging any fees, provided that aggregate inter Scheme/Plan investment made
by all Scheme/Plans under the same management or in Scheme/Plans under the management of any other
asset management company shall not exceed 5% of the net asset value of the mutual fund.
Such investment will be consistent with the investment objective of the Scheme/Plan. No investment
management fees will be charged by the AMC on such investments.
(t) The mutual fund shall not borrow except to meet temporary liquidity needs of the mutual funds for the
purpose of repurchase, redemption of units or payment of interest or dividend to the unitholders:
Provided that the mutual fund shall not borrow more than 20 percent of the net asset of the Scheme/Plan
and the duration of such a borrowing shall not exceed a period of six months.
(u) Group Exposure :
(i) Mutual Funds/AMCs shall ensure that total exposure of debt schemes of mutual funds in a group
(excluding investments in securities issued by Public Sector Units, Public Financial Institutions and
Public Sector Banks) shall not exceed 20% of the net assets of the scheme. Such investment limit
may be extended to 25% of the net assets of the scheme with the prior approval of the Board of
Trustees.
(ii) For this purpose, a group means a group as defined under regulation 2 (mm) of SEBI (Mutual Funds)
Regulations, 1996 (Regulations) and shall include an entity, its subsidiaries, fellow subsidiaries, its
holding company and its associates.
(v) Each of the Scheme(s)/Plan(s) shall abide by the terms and conditions issued by Central Board of Direct
taxes on notifying the Scheme as a Pension Fund under Section 80C(2)(xiv) of the Income Tax Act
1961.
(w) The AMC/Trustee may alter these above stated restrictions from time to time to the extent the SEBI
(MF) Regulations change, so as to permit the Scheme/Plan to make its investment in the full spectrum
of permitted investments for mutual funds to achieve its respective investment objective. The
AMC/Trustee may from time to time alter these restrictions in conformity with the (MF) Regulations.
J. HOW HAS THE SCHEME/PLAN PERFORMED?
Both the plans are new plans and does not have any performance track record.
III. UNITS AND OFFER
This section provides details you need to know for investing in the Scheme/Plan.
A. NEW FUND OFFER (NFO)
New Fund Offer Period UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser
Scheme/Plan and UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund –
This is the period during which a new Income Generator Scheme/Plan
Scheme/Plan sells its units to the NFO opens on: ______, 2016
investors. NFO closes on: ______, 2016
New Fund Offer will not be kept open for more than 15 days.
New Fund Offer Price: During the New Fund Offer period, the units of the
This is the price per unit that the Scheme/Plan/s will be sold at face value i.e. Rs.10/- per unit.
investors have to pay to invest during
the NFO.
Minimum Amount for Application in (a)Minimum amount for purchase:
the NFO Minimum initial investment under all the Plans and Options
is Rs.5,000/- and in multiples of Rs.500/- with no upper
37
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
limit.
Additional Purchase Amount Rs.1000/- and in the multiple
of Rs.500/- without any upper limit.
(ii) The requirement of minimum amount of Rs. 5000/- can
be relaxed if UTI AMC decides to enter into an arrangement
with any organisation (see sub clause b below) in terms of
which investment amount is deposited by the organisation on
behalf of/for the benefit of their employees/employees of
their associates/any group of people on a monthly basis,
provided however the aggregate amount of such investment
by the organisation is atleast Rs. 5000/- per month or such
amount as may be decided from time to time.
(iii) Each Unit Holder shall have only one folio in the
scheme. Multiple folios may not be permitted.
(b)Direct payment through employers
UTI AMC may enter into arrangements with any organisation
to accept investment under the scheme on behalf of/for the
benefit of their employees/employees of their associates/any
group of people on such terms as may be announced from
time to time.
(c) Switchover
UTI AMC may also permit the Unit Holders to switchover
their investment partially or fully to any other scheme/s of
UTI MF or vice versa as may be allowed by from time to
time on such terms as may be announced. In case of partial
switchover from one scheme to the other scheme/s, the
condition of holding minimum investment prescribed under
both the schemes has to be satisfied.
(d)Minimum Investment amount under the Direct Sub
Plan:
In case of already existing investments under the Existing
Plan, if the investor wants to further invest in the Direct Sub
Plan he/she will be required to invest the minimum
investment amount under the scheme, as specified above.
However, this minimum investment amount requirement is
not applicable in case of switchover from Existing Plan to
Direct Sub Plan or vice versa.
Dematerialisation Investors subscribing for the Units (other than by way of switch
in) may opt to hold Units in dematerialized mode by filling and
providing details of their demat account in the specified
application form. Units shall be allotted in physical form by
default, unless the investors intimate their intention of holding
Units in demat form by filling in the specified application form.
This option shall be available in accordance with the provisions
laid under the respective scheme(s) and in terms of
guidelines/procedural requirements as laid by the depositories
(NSDL/CDSL) from time to time.
Investors intending to hold the Units in Demat form are required
to have a beneficiary account with the Depository Participant
38
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(DP) registered with NSDL/CDSL and will be required to
indicate in the specified application form, the DP’s name, DP ID
number and the beneficiary account number of the Unit holder
with the DP. In case the Demat account details are not provided
or the details are incomplete or the details do not match with the
records as per Depository(ies), Units will be allotted in physical
form. The sequence of names/pattern of holding as mentioned in
the application form must be same as that in the demat account.
Units shall be credited to the investors’ demat account only after
the funds are credited into the Mutual Fund’s scheme(s) account
to the satisfaction of the AMC.
In case of credit of Units to depository account, applicants’
details like the mode of holding, bank account, correspondence
address, payment bank, nomination etc. will be considered as
appearing in the depository account for various purposes. For
any subsequent change in static information like address, bank
details, nomination etc. investors should approach their
respective depository. If the demat account details do not match
with applicants' name and order, units will be allotted the in
physical form. Bank details in such cases shall be captured from
the payment instrument provided by the investor. No further
transactions shall be permitted in such folio till the KYC related
documents or a valid depository account details are provided.
In case, the Unit holder desires to hold the Units in a
Dematerialized/Rematerialized form at a later date, the request
for conversion of units held in non-demat form into Demat
(electronic) form or vice-versa should be submitted alongwith a
Demat/Remat Request Form to their Depository Participants.
Rematerialization of Units will be in accordance with the
provisions of SEBI (Depositories & Participants) Regulations,
1996 as may be amended from time.
Units held in demat form will be transferable subject to the
provisions laid under the respective Scheme(s)/Plan(s) and in
accordance with provisions of Depositories Act, 1996 and the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Depositories and
Participants) Regulations, 1996 as may be amended from time to
time.
Minimum Target amount Targeted amount of Rs. 10 crores in case of UTI RBP - Wealth
Maximisation Plan and Rs. 20 crores in case of UTI RBP -
This is the minimum amount required Income Generator Scheme/Plan is proposed to be raised during
to operate the Scheme/Plan and if this the New Fund Offer Period of both Scheme/Plans. If the targeted
is not collected during the NFO period, amount of Rs.10 crores in case of UTI RBP - Wealth Maximiser
then all the investors would be Scheme/Plan and Rs. 20 crores in case of UTI RBP - Income
refunded the amount invested without Generator Scheme/Plan is not subscribed to, UTI AMC shall
any return. However, if AMC fails to refund the entire amount collected by the Scheme/Plan by an
refund the amount within 5 business account payee cheque/refund order or by any other mode of
days, interest as specified by SEBI payment as may be decided by UTI AMC within 5 business days
(currently 15% p.a.) will be paid to the from the close of the New Fund Offer period of the
investors from the expiry of 5 business Scheme/Plan. In the event of any failure to refund such amount
days from the date of closure of the within 5 business days from the close of the New Fund Offer
subscription period. period of the Scheme/Plan, UTI AMC shall be liable to pay to
the concerned applicant interest @ 15% p.a. or such rate as may
be prescribed by SEBI from time to time from the 6th day of the
39
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
date of closure of the New Fund Offer period of the
Scheme/Plan till the date of despatch of refund order.
Maximum Amount to be raised No maximum limit. Over subscription above Rs.10 crores in
(if any) This is the maximum amount case of UTI RBP - Wealth Maximisation Plan and Rs. 20 crores
which can be collected during the NFO in case of UTI RBP - Income Generator Scheme/Plan will be
period, as decided by the AMC retained in full.
Pre Closure & Extension of the Offer The AMC / Trustees reserve the right to extend the closing date
of the New Fund Offer period, subject to the condition that the
subscription to the New Fund Offer shall not be kept open for
more than 15 days. Similarly the AMC/Trustee may close the
New Fund Offer earlier by giving one day’s notice in one daily
newspaper.
Plans and Options offered The UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Wealth Maximiser
Scheme/Plan & Income Generator Scheme/Plan offers investors
following sub plans :
Regular Sub Plan
Direct Sub Plan
The Sub Plans offers the following options
i Growth Option
ii Dividend Option with Payout and Reinvestment facility
In case no option is indicated in the application form, then the
default option will be the Growth Option & Dividend
Reinvestment will be default facility.
Direct Sub Plan:
Direct Sub Plan is only for investors who purchase / subscribe
Units in the Plan directly with UTI Mutual Fund and is not
available for investors who route their investments through a
Distributor (AMFI registered distributor / ARN Holder).
Regular Sub Plan:
Regular Sub Plan is for investors who purchase /subscribe Units
in the Plan through a Distributor.
The Direct Sub Plan shall have a lower expense ratio as
compared to the Regular Sub Plan to the extent of distribution
expenses, commission, etc and no commission or distribution
expenses for distribution of Units will be paid / charged under
the Direct Sub Plan. The Direct Sub Plan shall have a separate
NAV.
The Direct Sub Plan and Regular Sub Plans will have a common
portfolio.
How to apply: Investors subscribing under Direct Sub Plan will
have to indicate “Direct Sub Plan” against the Plan name in the
application form as for example “UTI-Retirement Benefit
Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan – Direct Sub
Plan”.
40
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Treatment of applications under "Direct" / "Regular" Sub
Plans:
Broker Code Sub Plan Default Sub
Scenario mentioned by mentioned by Plan to be
the investor the investor captured
1 Not mentioned Not mentioned Direct Sub Plan
2 Not mentioned Direct Direct Sub Plan
3 Not mentioned Regular Direct Sub Plan
4 Mentioned Direct Direct Sub Plan
5 Direct Not mentioned Direct Sub Plan
6 Direct Regular Direct Sub Plan
7 Mentioned Regular Regular Sub Plan
8 Mentioned Not mentioned Regular Sub Plan
In cases of wrong/ invalid/ incomplete ARN codes mentioned on
the application form, the application shall be processed under
Regular Sub Plan. The AMC shall contact and obtain the correct
ARN code within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the
application form from the investor/ distributor. In case, the
correct code is not received within 30 calendar days, the AMC
shall reprocess the transaction under Direct Sub Plan from the
date of application without any exit load.
For further details on Direct Sub Plan, please refer to SAI.
Dividend Policy 1. Dividend Distribution
(a) Subject to availability of distributable surplus, the scheme
may make the dividend distribution at such intervals as may
be decided by the Trustee from time to time.
(b) Generally, for Unit Holders below the age of 58 years,
dividend distribution, if any, will automatically get
reinvested in the scheme at the ex-dividend NAV and
appropriate number of units will be credited to the accounts
of the Unit Holders.
(c) Dividend distribution by UTI AMC is independent of the
pledge/lien to which the units may be subjected to and UTI
AMC will not take note of the same.
(d) Such of the Unit Holders whose names appear in the register
of Unit Holders as at the record date fixed for each dividend
distribution shall be entitled to receive the dividend so
distributed.
(e) In case of Dividend Payout under a folio is less than or equal
to Rs. 1000/- and where complete bank account details are
not available or facility of electronic credit is not available
with Investor’s Bank/Bank Branch, then such amount will be
compulsorily reinvested wherever reinvestment option is
available under the scheme and an account statement will be
sent to the investors at their Registered Address.
There is no assurance or guarantee to the Unit holders as to the
rate of dividend distribution
41
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Default Option :
The investor must clearly specify his choice of option/facility. In
the absence of such clear instruction, it will be assumed that the
investor has opted for ‘default’ option / facility and the
application will be processed accordingly. The default option /
facility are: Default Option: Growth (between Growth and
Dividend) Default Facility: Dividend Reinvestment facility
(between Dividend Reinvestment and Dividend Payout facility)
Policy on Unclaimed Redemption As per SEBI guidelines, the unclaimed redemption and dividend
and Dividend Amounts amounts, that are currently allowed to be deployed only in call
money market or money market instruments, shall also be
allowed to be invested in a separate plan of Liquid scheme /
Money Market Mutual Fund scheme floated by Mutual Funds
specifically for deployment of the unclaimed amounts.
As per the regulations, AMC shall not charge any exit load in
this plan and TER (Total Expense Ratio) of such plan shall be
capped at 50 bps.
Investors who claim the unclaimed amounts during a period of
three years from the due date shall be paid initial unclaimed
amount along-with the income earned on its deployment. After
the third year, the income earned on such unclaimed amounts
shall be used for the purpose of investor education.
The Fund will make continuous efforts to remind the investors
through letters to take their unclaimed amounts.
Additional Mode of Payment during Investors may apply for the UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension
NFO Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan and UTI-Retirement
Benefit Pension Fund – Income Generator Scheme/Plan through
Applications Supported by Blocked Amount (ASBA) process
during the NFO period by filling in the ASBA form and
submitting the same to their respective banks, which in turn will
block the subscription amount in the said account as per the
authority contained in ASBA form and undertake other tasks as
per the procedure specified therein. (The details of banks’
branches accepting ASBA form are available on the websites of
BSE (www.bseindia.com), NSE (www.nseindia.com) and SEBI
(www.sebi.gov.in) or at your nearest UTI Financial Centre.) For
applicants applying through ASBA, on the date of allotment, the
amount will be unblocked in their respective bank accounts and
account will be debited to the extent required to pay for
allotment of Units applied in the application form.
Mode of Payment – Cash / Transfer Cash payment to the extent of Rs.50,000/- per investor, per
of funds through NEFT/RTGS Mutual Fund, per financial year through designated branches of
Axis Bank will be accepted (even from such small investors who
may not be tax payers and may not have Permanent Account
Number (PAN)/bank accounts, subject to the following
procedure.
i. Investors who desire to invest upto Rs.50,000/- per financial
year shall contact any of our UFCs and obtain a Form for
Deposit of Cash and fill-up the same.
ii. Investors shall then approach the designated branch of Axis
42
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Bank along with the duly filled-in Form for Deposit of Cash
and deposit the cash.
iii. Axis Bank will provide an Acknowledgement slip containing
the details of Date & Time of deposit, Unique serial number,
Scheme/Plan Name, Name of the Investor and Cash amount
deposited. The Investors shall attach the Acknowledgement
slip with the duly filled-in application form and submit them
at the UFCs for time stamping.
iv. Applicability of NAV will be based on depositing of cash at
the designated bank branch before the cut-off time and time-
stamping of the valid application together with the
acknowledgement slip at the UTI Financial centre
(UFC)/Official Point of Acceptance (OPA). For further
details refer to SAI/relevant addendum.
Transfer of funds through National Electronic Funds
Transfer (NEFT) / Real Time Gross Settlement(RTGS) for
investment amount of Rs. 2 lacs and above :
Investor shall ensure that the payment is made from one of
his/her registered bank accounts in the folio. If the name of the
remitter/account number from where the amount is remitted is
not matching with the registered / to be registered bank accounts
details, such remittances shall be treated as third party payments
and such applications are liable to be rejected. In such cases,
UTI MF will refund the amount to the remitter within 30
calendar days from the date of receipt of the funds, as per the
details made available to UTI MF by the remitting Bank.
For further details, please refer to SAI.
Allotment Subject to the receipt of the specified Minimum Subscription
Amount for the Scheme/Plan, full allotment will be made to all
valid applications received during the New Fund Offer. The
Trustee reserves the right, at their discretion without assigning
any reason thereof, to reject any application. Allotment will be
completed within 5 (Five) business days from the closure of the
New Fund Offer.
(a) At the time of joining the Scheme/Plan the UTI AMC shall
arrange to issue to the applicant, a statement of account
indicating his admission to the Scheme/Plan and other
relevant details within a period not later than 5 business
days from the closure of the New Fund Offer.
(b) Every Unit Holder will be given a membership/folio
number, which will be appearing in SoA for his initial
investment. Further investments in the same name(s) and
in the same order would be registered under the same
folio, if folio number is mentioned by the Unit Holder. In
all future correspondence with the UTI AMC the Unit
Holder shall have to quote the membership/folio number.
(c) SoA will be valid evidence of admission of the applicant
into the Scheme/Plan. However, where the units are issued
subject to realization of cheque/draft such issue of units
43
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
will be cancelled if the cheque/draft is returned unpaid and
treated having not been issued.
(d) The NRI applicant may choose to receive the SOA at
his/her Indian/foreign address or at the address of his/her
relative resident in India.
(e) UTI AMC shall send the SoA at the address mentioned in
the application form and recorded with UTI AMC and
shall not incur any liability for loss, damage, mis-delivery
or non-delivery of the SoA.
(f) If a Unit Holder desires to have a unit certificate (UC) in
lieu of SoA the same would be issued to him within 30
days from the date of receipt of such request.
(g) In case the unit certificate or SoA is mutilated/defaced/lost,
UTI AMC may issue a duplicate SoA on receipt of a
request to that effect from the Unit Holder on a plain paper
or in the manner as may be prescribed from time to time.
Refund If application is rejected, full amount will be refunded within 5
business days of closure of NFO. If refunded later than 5
business days, interest @ 15% p.a. for delay period will be paid
and charged to the AMC.
Risk Mitigation process against Restriction on Third Party Payments
Third Party Cheques Third party payments are not accepted in any of the
Scheme/Plans of UTI Mutual Fund subject to certain exceptions.
“Third Party Payments” means the payment made through
instruments issued from an account other than that of the
beneficiary investor mentioned in the application form.
However, in case of payments from a joint bank account, the
first named applicant/investor has to be one of the joint holders
of the bank account from which payment is made.
Bank Mandate registration as part of the new folio creation
In order to reduce the risk of frauds and operational risks and
thereby protect the interests of the Unit holders/Investors from
fraudulent encashment of redemption/dividend proceeds,
Investors are required to submit any of the prescribed documents
(along with original document for verification) in support of the
bank mandate mentioned in the application form for subscription
under a new folio, in case these details are not the same as the
bank account from which the investment is made.
In case, the application for subscription does not comply with
the above requirements, UTI AMC, at its sole and absolute
discretion, may reject/not process such application and may
refund the subscription amount to the bank account from where
the investment was made and shall not be liable for any such
rejection/refund.
For further details on documents to be submitted under the
process to identify third party payments etc, please refer to
SAI/relevant Addenda.
44
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Who can invest Applicants
(a) An application for units may be made by any resident or
This is an indicative list and you are non-resident Indian adult individual either singly or jointly
requested to consult your financial with another individual on joint / anyone or survivor basis.
advisor to ascertain whether the
Scheme/Plan is suitable to your risk (b) A Body Corporate or an eligible trust or a society can also
profile. invest in the Scheme/Plan for the benefit of individuals.
However, membership will be granted in the name of such
beneficiary individuals and not in the name of body
corporate or eligible trust. Subject to the Regulations, the
Sponsors, the Mutual Funds managed by them, their
associates and the AMC may acquire units of the
Scheme/Plan. The AMC shall not be entitled to charge any
fees on its investments in the Scheme/Plan.
Subject to the Regulations, the sponsors, the Mutual Funds
managed by them, their associates and the AMC may acquire
units of the Scheme/Plan. The AMC shall not be entitled to
charge any fees on its investments in the Scheme/Plan.
Note:
(a) In terms of the notification No. FERA/195/99-RB dated
March 30, 1999 and FERA/212/99-RB dated October 18,
1999, the RBI has granted a general permission to mutual
funds, as referred to in Clause 23(D) of Section 10 of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 to issue and repurchase Units of their
Scheme/Plans which are approved by SEBI to NRIs/PIOs
and FPIs respectively, subject to conditions set out in the
aforesaid notifications. Further, general permission is also
granted to send such Units to NRIs/PIOs and FPIs to their
place of residence or location as the case may be.
(b) Returned cheques are liable not to be presented again for
collection, and the accompanying Application Forms are
liable to be rejected. In case the returned cheques are
presented again, the necessary charges are liable to be
debited to the investor.
“Neither this Scheme/Plan Information Document nor the units
have been registered in any jurisdiction including the United
States of America. The distribution of this Scheme/Plan
Information Document in certain jurisdictions may be restricted
or subject to registration requirements and, accordingly, persons
who come into possession of this Scheme/Plan Information
Document are required to inform themselves about, and to
observe any such restrictions. No persons receiving a copy of
this Scheme/Plan Information Document or any accompanying
application form in such jurisdiction may treat this Scheme/Plan
Information Document or such application form as constituting
an invitation to them to subscribe for units, nor should they in
any event use any such application form, unless in the relevant
jurisdiction such an invitation could lawfully be made to them
and such application form could lawfully be used without
compliance with any registration or other legal requirements.
Accordingly this Scheme/Plan Information Document does not
45
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
constitute an offer or solicitation by anyone in any jurisdiction in
which such offer or solicitation is not lawful or in which the
person making such offer or solicitation is not qualified to do so
or to anyone to whom it is unlawful to make such offer or
solicitation.
It is the responsibility of any persons in possession of this
Scheme/Plan Information Document and any persons wishing to
apply for units pursuant to this Scheme/Plan Information
Document to inform themselves of and to observe, all applicable
laws and Regulations of such relevant jurisdiction”.
Non-acceptance of subscriptions from OCBs in the
Scheme/Plans of UTI MF.
Investments by Overseas Corporate Bodies (OCBs)
Pursuant to the Foreign Exchange Management [Withdrawal of
General Permission to Overseas Corporate Bodies (OCBs)]
Regulations, 2003, and the consequential amendments made in
the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or issue of
Security by a Person Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000,
OCBs, cannot invest, inter alia, in Mutual Fund Scheme/Plans.
‘Overseas Corporate Body’ (OCB)
As per Regulation 2(xi) of the Foreign Exchange Management
(Deposit) Regulations, 2000, 'Overseas Corporate Body’ means
a company, partnership firm, society and other corporate body
owned directly or indirectly to the extent of at least sixty per
cent by Non-Resident Indians (hereinafter referred to as ‘NRIs’)
and includes overseas trust in which not less than sixty percent
beneficial interest is held by Non-resident Indians (hereinafter
referred to as ‘Overseas Trust’) directly or indirectly but
irrevocably.
Investment by Individuals – Foreign Nationals
For the purposes of carrying out the transactions by Foreign
Nationals in the units of the Scheme/Plans of UTI Mutual Fund,
1. Foreign Nationals shall be resident in India as per the
provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
2. Foreign Nationals are required to comply (including taking
necessary approvals) with all the laws, rules, regulations,
guidelines and circulars, as may be issued/applicable from
time to time, including but not limited to and pertaining to
anti money laundering, know your customer (KYC), income
tax, foreign exchange management (the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 and the Rules and Regulations made
thereunder) including in all the applicable jurisdictions.
UTI AMC reserves the right to amend/terminate this facility at
any time, keeping in view business/operational exigencies.
Holding Basis: In the event an account has more than one
46
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
registered holder the first-named Unit holder shall receive the
account statements, all notices and correspondence with respect
to the account, as well as the proceeds of any Redemption
requests or dividends or other distributions. In addition, such
holder shall have the voting rights, as permitted, associated with
such Units as per the applicable guidelines.
Applicants can specify the ‘mode of holding’ in the prescribed
application form as ‘Jointly’ or ‘Anyone or Survivor’. In the
case of holding specified as ‘Jointly’, Redemption requests
would have to be signed by all joint holders. However, in cases
of holding specified as ‘Anyone or Survivor’, any one of the
Unit holders will have the power / authority to make
Redemption requests, without it being necessary for all the Unit
holders to sign. However, in all cases, the proceeds of the
Redemption will be paid to the first-named Unit holder.
In case of death / insolvency of any one or more of the persons
named in the Register of Unit holders as the joint holders of any
Units, the AMC shall not be bound to recognise any person(s)
other than the remaining holders. In all such cases, the proceeds
of the Redemption will be paid to the first-named of such
remaining Unit holders.
Uniform Procedure for Updation / A. Updation / Change of address
Change of Address & Change / Investors are requested to update their change of address within
Updation of Bank details 30 days from the date of change.
Investors are required to submit the documents to the
intermediaries of KYC Registration Agency (KRA) as may be
specified by them, from time to time.
For further details on list of documents to be
submitted/acceptable etc, please refer to SAI.
B. Updation/Change of Bank details
Investors are requested to update/change their bank details using
the Form for registration of multiple bank accounts. Investors
are required to submit self attested copy of the supporting
documents, having validity at the time of submission, each
towards Proof of Identity and proof of old and new bank
accounts for updating /changing the bank details
For further details on documents to be submitted/acceptable in
respect of old investments where bank details are not updated,
procedural requirements to be completed in respect of
investments made in the name of minor child on attaining
majority, receiving of dividend/redemption payment in bank
account etc, please refer to SAI.
Non-submission of required documents
In case of non-submission of required documents as required
under A and B aforesaid, UTI Mutual Fund, at its sole and
absolute discretion, may reject the transaction or may decide
alternate method of processing such requests.
For further details, refer to SAI
47
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Where can you submit the filled up Name and Address of Registrar:
applications. Karvy Computershare Pvt. Ltd,
Unit: UTIMF,
Karvy Selenium Tower B,
Plot Nos. 31 & 32 Financial District,
Nanakramguda, Serilingampally Mandal,
Hyderabad – 500032,
Board No: 040 - 6716 2222,
Fax no : 040- 6716 1888,
Email:uti@karvy.com
The details of Official Points of Acceptance are given on the
back cover page.
Custodian of the Scheme/Plan The Trustees have appointed Stock Holding Corporation of
India Ltd (SCHIL) as the Custodian of the Scheme/Plan.
How to Apply Please refer to the Statement of Additional information and Key
Information Memorandum cum Application form for the
instructions.
Listing Units of the Plan are not listed in any Stock Exchange in view of
a redemption facility being offered to investors after initial
Lock-in-Period of 5 years from the date of allotment.
However, the AMC at its sole discretion may list the Units under
the Scheme on one or more stock exchanges at a later date.
Special Products / facilities offered Special Products and facilities offered during NFO under both
during NFO the plans
(a) Systematic Investment Plan (SIP): An investor can
benefit under this facility by investing specified amounts
regularly. Minimum investment amount for investing SIP
route is as follows:
i. Monthly Frequency: Rs. 500 & in multiples of Re 1/-
thereafter for minimum 12 months
ii. Quarterly Frequency: Rs. 1,500 & in multiples of Re. 1/-
thereafter for minimum 4 quarters
In addition to the existing options / facilities available under
Systematic Investment Plan (SIP), the following new facilities /
options are available:-
Please refer to Statement of Additional Information (SAI)
for SIP/Micro SIP and details
1. ‘Step up’ facility: Under this facility, an Investor can opt
for stepping up his SIP amount at specified intervals (Half
yearly / Yearly). Upon exercising this option, the SIP debit
amount will increase by the amount specified by the
Investor at the Intervals opted.
2. Any Day SIP: Currently, an Investor can start SIP only on
specified date/s of the month i.e., 1st, 7th, 15th & 25th.
Investors can now choose any date of his/her preference as
SIP Debit Date. If in any month, the SIP Debit Date opted
by the Investor is not available (Say, 29th & 30th in
48
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
February and 31st in case of alternate months), then the SIP
Debit Date for those months shall be the last available
Business Day in that month.
For further details on the facilities aforesaid, please refer to
SAI/Addendum No. 38/15-16 dated 16th September 2015.
(b) Systematic Withdrawal Plan (SWP) : The Scheme/Plan
under which Unit Holders will accumulate their investment
upto a period as specified below and thereafter, can opt to
receive the accumulated investment in the form similar to
annuity by repurchasing the units over a period of time to
be indicated by them. The broad features of the SWP are as
under:
(1) Eligibility : Unit Holders may utilize the SWP to
receive regular monthly / quarterly payments their account
after five year lock in period or attainment of 58 years of
age whichever is later, provided minimum balance of
Rs.10,000/- (total investment value at NAV) under the
scheme under the folio is available at the time of
commencing such payment.
(2) Periodicity : Based on the information furnished by the
unitholder(s) in the application form at the time of
subscription or updated from time to time, the AMC will
decide upon the periodicity of withdrawal. Such
periodicity could be monthly, quarterly, half yearly or
yearly.
(3) Minimum amount of withdrawal: Under any interval
chosen by the Unit Holder, the minimum amount of each
withdrawal has to be Rs. 1,000/- and multiples of Rs. 100/-
thereafter. The withdrawal will continue till the outstanding
amount in the folio is reduced to nil or such other amount
as may be decided by the AMC from time to time. If the
amount in the folio is less than the opted amount the
available amount will be paid to the Unit Holder.
Further, if say the opted amount under SWP is Rs. 1000/-
and during the course of SWP an amount of Rs. 1500/- only
is left in the account, the entire outstanding amount of Rs.
1500/- may be paid out at one go, at the option of the AMC.
(4) Withdrawal of units : Withdrawal of units under the
SWP will be made on the 1st business day in AMC's
Corporate Office of due month at NAV prevailing as on
that date. If 1st of any due month happens to be a non-
business day in AMC's Corporate Office, the date of
withdrawal will be the following business day in AMC's
Corporate office. Withdrawal of units will be made on first
in first out basis for the purpose of computing the capital
gains, if any.
(5) Mode of payment : Withdrawal of units under any
option will commence from 1st April or 1st October falling
immediately after the attainment of the eligible age of 58
49
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
years or lapse of eligible period of 5 years as the case may
be depending upon the age of entry. The payment of SWP
will be made to the investor within 10 business days from
the 1st business day of the month (in case of quarterly/half-
yearly/yearly periodicity this will be 1st business day of the
quarter, half year and year) as per the mode of payment
as may be decided by UTI AMC Ltd. from time to time.
(6) Withdrawal from SWP : In case any Unit Holder
wants to withdraw from the SWP, he/she may do so by
intimating to UTI AMC and such withdrawal will be
effective from the next April or October, as the case may
be.
(7) Receipt by Unit Holder to discharge UTI AMC : The
receipt by the Unit Holder for any amount paid to him/her
in respect of the outstanding units shall be deemed to be a
good discharge to the UTI AMC.
(c) Dividend Transfer Plan (DTP): Under DTP, dividend as
& when declared (as reduced by the amount of applicable
statutory levy) in the transferor scheme (subject to
minimum of Rs.1000/-) will be automatically invested into
the transferee scheme, as opted by the Unit holder. Such
transfer will be treated as fresh subscription in the
transferee scheme and invested at the Applicable NAV on
the Business Day immediately following the record date,
subject to terms and conditions applicable to the transferee
scheme.
The units will be allotted in the Transferee Scheme subject
to the terms and conditions mentioned in the Scheme
Information Document (SID) of Transferee Scheme after
deduction of applicable statutory levy, if any.
This facility will not be available for units which are under
any Lien/Pledged.
(d) Systematic Transfer Investment Plan (STRIP): It is an
optional facility wherein investor's entire investment (Lump
Sum/existing SIP) shall be switched/transferred
automatically at regular intervals from one designated
scheme to another designated scheme of UTI MF.
However, the transfer from UTI Retirement Benefit
Pension Fund - Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan or UTI
Retirement Benefit Pension Fund - Income Generator
Scheme/Plan to any other Scheme/Plan of UTI Mutual
Fund (with nil Exit Load) shall be at any date as specified
by the investor on or after attainment of 58 years of age or
after completion of 5 years lock in period, whichever is
later.
Nil exit load will be applicable in case if investor wants to
transfer the units from UTI RBP - Wealth Maximiser
Scheme/Plan/scheme to UTI RBP - Income Generator
50
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Scheme/Plan existing under UTI RBP umbrella during or
after the lock in period.
(Please refer to Statement of Additional Information (SAI)
for more details).
MF Utility for Investors UTI AMC Ltd has entered into an agreement with MF Utilities
India Private Ltd (MFUI) for usage of MF Utility (MFU), a
shared service initiative of various Asset Management
Companies, which acts as a transaction aggregation portal for
transacting in multiple Scheme/Plans of various Mutual Funds
witj9h a single form and a single payment instrument through a
Common Account Number (CAN)
Accordingly, all financial and non-financial transactions
pertaining to Scheme/Plans of UTI Mutual Fund excluding UTI
Nifty, UTI Children’s Career Balanced Plan, UTI Children’s
career Advantage Fund and UTI ULIP are available through
MFU either electronically on www.mfuonline.com as and when
such a facility is made available by MFUI or physically through
authorised Points Of Service (“POS) of MFUI with effect from
the respective dates as published on MFUI website against the
POS locations. However, all such transactions shall be subject to
the eligibility of investors, any terms and conditions and
compliance with the submission of documents and procedural
requirements as stipulated by UTI MF/UTI AMC from time to
time in addition to the conditions specified by MFU, if any.
The online portal of MFUI i.e. www.mfuonline.com and the
POS locations aforesaid shall act as Official Points of
Acceptance (OPAs) in addition to the existing OPAs of the UTI
AMC Ltd and any transaction submitted at such POS will be
routed through MFUI or as may be decided by UTI AMC.
Investors not registered with MFUI also can submit their
transactions request by giving reference to their existing folio
number. All valid applications received for any other
Scheme/Plan apart from eligible Scheme/Plans as stated above
may be accepted by UTI AMC at its own discretion
The uniform cut off time as prescribed by SEBI and as
mentioned in the SID/KIM of the respective Scheme/Plans shall
be applicable for applications received by MFUI. However, in
case of investment of any amount in liquid funds and Rs 2 lacs
and above for other Scheme/Plans, the applicability of NAV will
be subject to the date and time of receipt of credit of amount to
the specified bank account of AMC.
For further details regarding procedures for obtaining CAN and
other particulars about MFU etc, please refer to Addendum No
50/2014-15 dated 5th February 2015/SAI. Investors may also
contact the nearest POS aforesaid for procedures to be complied
with in this regard.
Restrictions, if any, on the right to In the event of the death of the Unit Holder, the joint
freely retain or dispose holder(s)/nominee/legal representative of the Unit Holder may,
if he is otherwise eligible for joining the Scheme/Plan as Unit
Holder, be permitted to hold the units and become a Unit
Holder. In that event a fresh SoA will be issued in his name in
respect of units so desired to be held by him subject to his
51
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
complying with the condition of minimum holding and the
required procedure as may be prescribed by UTI AMC from
time to time.
Refer to Statement of Additional Information (SAI) on
Settlement of claims under Clause III
B. ONGOING OFFER DETAILS
Ongoing Offer Period Within 5 Business days from the date of allotment.
This is the date from which the
Scheme/Plan will reopen for
subscriptions/redemptions after the
closure of the NFO period.
Ongoing price for subscription The face value of a unit is Rs.10/- and units will be issued in
(purchase) / switch-in (from other fractions up to three decimal places.
Scheme/Plans/plans of the mutual Purchase on all business days at the applicable NAV.
fund) by investors.
This is the price you need to pay Entry Load : Not Applicable as per SEBI guidelines.
for purchase/switch-in.
Exit Load (as % of NAV): 1% if redeemed/switched out from
UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser
Scheme/Plan or Income Generator Scheme/Plan before
attainment of 58 years of age.
No Exit Load will be charged in case of SWP / Redemption /
Switch out from UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund–Wealth
Maximiser Scheme/Plan or Income Generator Scheme/Plan on
or after attainment of 58 years of age or after completion of 5
year lock in period, whichever is later.
Ongoing price for redemption The Scheme/Plan / plan provide redemption / switch out facility
(sale) /switch outs (to other on all business days on NAV based prices after the initial lock in
Scheme/Plans/plans of the Mutual period of 5 years from the date of allotment of units subject to
Fund) by investors. prevailing exit load.
This is the price you will receive
for redemptions/switch outs.
Example : If the applicable NAV is
Rs.10, exit load is 2% then
redemption price will be : Rs.10*(1-
0.02) = Rs. 9.80
Cut off timing for subscriptions/ Liquidity
redemptions/ switches The Scheme/Plan / plan provide redemption / switch out facility
on all business days on NAV based prices after the initial lock in
period of 5 years from the date of allotment of units.
This is the time before which your Purchase : For Purchases less than Rs.2 lacs:
application (complete in all
Operation Cut-off Timing Applicable NAV
respects) should reach the official
Valid applications Upto 3 p.m. NAV of the day of
points of acceptance.
received with local receipt of the
cheques / demand application.
drafts payable at par at
the place where the
application is received.
52
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Valid applications After 3 p.m. NAV of the next
received with local business day.
cheques / demand
drafts payable at par at
the place where the
application is received.
Valid applications Within Business NAV of the day on
received with Hours which cheque /
outstation cheques / demand draft is
demand drafts (for the credited to the
Scheme/Plans / Scheme/Plan.
investors as permitted
in the Scheme/Plan
Information
Documents) not
payable at par at the
place where the
application is received.
Purchase : For Purchases of Rs.2 lacs and above:
Operation Cut-off Timing Applicable NAV
Valid Upto 3 p.m. NAV of the day on
applications which the funds are
received with available for
cheques / demand utilisation shall be
drafts and also applicable. In case
the funds are either the Funds or
available for the Applications are
utilization before received on any
cut off subsequent business
day, the NAV
applicable for the
later business day
will be applied
The above mentioned rule will be applicable irrespective of the
date of debit to investor’s account. Rs.2 lacs shall be considered
after considering multiple applications received from the
investor under all the Scheme/Plans/plans on the day and also
under all modes of investment i.e. additional purchase,
Systematic Investment Plan (SIP), Systematic Transfer
Investment Plan (STRIP), Switch, etc. The investor will be
identified through PAN.
Redemption :
Operation Cut-off Timing Applicable NAV
Valid Upto 3 p.m. NAV of the day of
applications receipt of the
received application
Valid After 3 p.m. NAV of the next
applications business day.
received
Redemption requests: Where, under a Scheme/Plan, units are
held under both the Regular Sub Plan and Direct Sub Plan, the
redemption/switch request shall clearly mention the plan. If no
Plan is mentioned, it would be processed on a first in first out
53
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(FIFO) basis considering both the Plans.
Tax consequences: Switch / redemption may entail tax
consequences. Investors should consult their professional tax
advisor before initiating such requests in this regard.
Book Closure Period / Record The purchase and redemption of units shall remain open on all
Date business days throughout the year except during book closure
period/s not exceeding 15 days in a year.
Where can the applications for The details of official points of acceptance are given on the back
purchase/redemption/switches be cover page.
submitted?
In addition to the circumstances mentioned in the SAI, the
Trustee/AMC shall have the absolute discretion to accept/reject
any application for purchase of units, if in the opinion of the
Trustee/AMC, increasing the size of the Scheme/Plan’s Unit
Capital is not in the general interest of the Unit holders, or the
Trustee/AMC for any other reason believes it would be in the
best interest of the Scheme/Plan or the Unit Holders to accept /
reject such an application.
It is mandatory for investors to mention their bank account
particulars in their applications.
Minimum amount for (a) Minimum amount for purchase:
purchase/redemption/ switches Minimum initial investment under all the Plans and Options
is Rs.5,000/- and in multiples of Rs.500/- without any upper
limit.
Additional Purchase Amount Rs.1000/- and in the multiple
of Rs.500/- without any upper limit.
(b) Minimum amount of redemption/switches:
In case of partial redemption /switches the condition of
holding minimum investment prescribed under the
Scheme/Plan has to be satisfied.
Redemption of units will be allowed after an initial Lock-in-
Period of 5 years from the date of allotment.
Know Your Customer (KYC) Common Standard KYC through 1) CDSL Ventures Ltd (CVL)
Norms 2)NSDL, Database Management Limited (NDML), 3) DotEx
International Limited (DotEx), 4) CAMS Investor Services
Private Limited, 5) Karvy Data Management Services Limited
or any other KRA as may be registered from time to time is
applicable for all categories of investors and for any amount of
investment. KYC done once with a SEBI registered intermediary
will be valid with another intermediary. Intermediaries shall
carry out In-Person Verification (IPV) of their clients.
Existing investors in mutual funds who have already complied
with the KYC requirement are exempt from following the new
KYC procedure effective January 01, 2012 but only for the
purpose of making additional investment in the Scheme/Plan(s) /
Plan(s) of any Mutual Fund registered with SEBI.
However, existing investors who are KYC compliant before 1st
January 2012 will have to complete the new KYC requirements
54
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
and get the IPV done if they wish to deal with any other SEBI
registered intermediary other than a Mutual Fund.
KYC guidelines are not applicable to investors coming under
Micro Pension products.
In this connection, all the existing/prospective investors are
requested to take the following action/s for complying with
uniform KYC requirements:
1. Instances where no action is required
a) In the case of those individual investors and non-individual
investors, other than Corporates, Partnership Firms and
Trusts, who have complied with Uniform KYC
requirements on or after January 1, 2012 and who have
already updated their status with UTI Mutual Fund, no
action will be required for undertaking the KYC process.
b) Existing investors of UTI MF, who are already KYC
compliant as per UTI MF’s records on or before 31.12.2011,
may continue to invest for their future transactions
(including additional purchases, Systematic Investment
Plans [SIPs], etc.) under the existing folios which are KYC
Compliant.
2. Instances where partial action is required
a) All those Individual Investors who wish to open a new folio
with UTI Mutual Fund after November 30, 2012 and are
KYC compliant on or before 31.12.2011, are required to
submit “KYC details Change Form” with purchase
application, along with required documentary proofs, to
update their ‘Missing/Not Available’ information such as
Father’s / Spouse’s name, Marital Status, Nationality, Gross
Annual Income or Net Worth as on date (as per Part B of the
“KYC Details Change” form) and complete ‘In Person
Verification’ (IPV) process. Such investors may also use the
same form for change of address or e-mail ID along with
required documentary proofs.
b) Entities which are Corporates, Partnership Firms and Trusts
and which have complied with Uniform KYC requirements
on or after January 1, 2012, are required to submit their
Balance Sheet for every financial year on an ongoing basis,
within a reasonable period.
3. Instances where complete KYC compliance is required
a) For existing investors as well as new investors who are not
yet KYC Compliant, are required to submit the KYC
Application form duly filled in with requisite documentary
proofs to KRAs along with completion of IPV process, to
comply with uniform KYC requirements as stipulated by
SEBI in case they intend to make purchase/additional
purchase/switches/SIP etc. with UTI Mutual Fund.
b) In case of Non Individual investors even if they are KYC
compliant prior to December 31, 2011, uniform KYC
55
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
requirements need to be complied with afresh due to
significant and major changes in uniform KYC requirements
by submitting KYC form for Non-Individuals with requisite
documentary proofs, if they intend to open a new folio with
UTI Mutual Fund.
PAN-Exemption for micro financial products
Only individual Investors (including NRIs, Minors & Sole
proprietary firms) who do not have a PAN, and who wish to
invest upto Rs.50000/- in a financial year under any
Scheme/Plan including investments, if any, under SIPs shall be
exempted from the requirement of PAN on submission of duly
filled in purchase application forms with payment along with
KYC application form with other prescribed documents towards
proof of identity as specified by SEBI. For all other categories of
investors, this exemption is not applicable.
Please refer to the SAI for further details on KYC and on non
applicability of the aforesaid guidelines to certain other category
of investors and transactions.
Details of Beneficial Ownership
In terms of SEBI Master Circular on AML/CFT dated December
31, 2010, ‘Beneficial Owner’ has been defined as a natural
person/s who ultimately own, control or influence a client and /
or persons on whose behalf a transaction is being conducted,
which includes persons who exercise ultimate effective control
over a legal person or arrangement.
Further, the Prevention of Money Laundering Rules, 2005
(PMLR 2005) read with Prevention of Money Laundering Act,
2002 also require that all the beneficial owner(s) shall identify
themselves with the intermediary through whom his/her/their
investments are made in the Scheme/Plan.
In order to comply with the above Act/Rules/Regulations, the
following Client Due Diligence (CDD) process is being
implemented.
Applicability:
It is applicable to all categories of investors except a) Individuals
and b) a company listed on a stock exchange or is a majority
owned subsidiary of such a company
Providing information about beneficial ownership will be
applicable to all the investments received from January 1, 2014,
from the above category of investors.
Above information shall be provided by the investors to UTI
Asset Management Company Ltd (UTI AMC) / its Registrar, till
the same is taken over by KYC Registering Authority (KRA).
Details of the identity of the beneficial owner/ all natural
person(s) such as their Name(s), PAN number/Passport details,
Address etc together with a self attested PAN Card copy is to be
provided by the Investor to the Official Points of Acceptance
56
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(OPAs) of the UTI MF Scheme/Plans/aforesaid Registrar while
submitting the Application Form. Such beneficial owners/natural
persons include those who are acting alone or together, or
through one or more juridical person and exercising control
through ownership or who ultimately has a controlling
ownership interest.
In case of any change in the beneficial ownership, the
investor will be responsible to intimate UTI AMC / its
Registrar / KRA as may be applicable immediately about
such change.
For further details regarding manner of determination of
beneficial ownership in doubtful cases (relating to investors
other than Trust and Foreign investors), investments by Trust
and Foreign Investors and for other details regarding disclosure
of information regarding beneficial ownership etc., please refer
to SAI/relevant Addendum.
Details under Foreign Account Tax FATCA is United States (US) Federal Law, aimed at prevention
Compliance provisions (commonly of tax evasion by US citizens and residents (“US persons” as
known as FATCA) / Foreign Tax defined in the applicable extant laws of the United States of
Laws and Common Reporting America) through use of offshore accounts. FATCA provisions
Standard (CRS) are part of Hiring Incentives to Restore Employment (HIRE)
Act, enacted by US Legislature. Under FATCA, withholding tax
may be levied on certain US source income/receipt of the
Scheme/Plans of the Mutual Fund, unless they are FATCA
compliant.
FATCA obligates foreign financial institutions (FFIs), including
Indian financial institutions to provide the US Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) with information on the accounts of to report
accounts held by specified US Persons as well as passive NFFEs
in which controlling interest is held by specified US person. The
term FFI is defined widely to cover a large number of non-US
based financial service providers, such as mutual funds,
depository participants, brokers, custodians, as well as banks.
FATCA requires enhanced due diligence processes by the FFI so
as to identify US reportable accounts.
The identification of US person will be based on one or more of
following “US indicia”-
•
Identification of the Account Holder as a US citizen or
resident;
•
Unambiguous indication of a US place of birth;
•
Current US mailing or residence address (including a US post
office box);
•
Current US telephone number;
•
Standing instructions to transfer funds to an account
maintained in USA;
•
Current effective power of attorney or signing authority
granted to a person with a US address; or
•
An “in-care of” or “hold mail” address that is the sole address
that the Indian Financial Institution has on the file for the
Account Holder.
57
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
FATCA due diligence will be applicable to each unit holder
(including joint holders) irrespective of the country of
residence/citizenship, and on being identified as reportable
person/specified US person, all folios/accounts will be reported.
Such information may include (not limited to) their identity,
direct or indirect beneficiaries, beneficial owners and controlling
persons. Unit holders will therefore be required to comply with
the request of the AMC / Fund to furnish such information as
and when deemed necessary by the AMC / Fund in accordance
with the Applicable Laws.
FATCA provisions are relevant not only at on-boarding stage of
unit holders but also throughout the life cycle of investment with
the Mutual Fund. Unit holders therefore should immediately
intimate to the Fund/the AMC, any change in their status with
respect to FATCA related declaration provided by them
previously.
In case unit holder / investor fails to furnish the relevant
information and/or documentation in accordance with the
Applicable Laws, the AMC / Fund reserves the right to reject the
application or redeem the units held directly or beneficially and
may also require reporting of such accounts/levy of withholding
tax on payments made to investors. Prospective investors / Unit
holders should consult their own advisors to understand the
implications of FATCA provisions/requirements. The AMC
reserves the right to change/modify the provisions mentioned at
a later date.
Common Reporting Standard (CRS) – The New Global
Standard for Automatic Exchange of Information
On similar lines as FATCA, the Organisation of Economic
Development (OECD), along with the G20 countries, of which
India is a member, has released a “Standard for Automatic
Exchange of Financial Account Information in Tax Matters”, in
order to combat the problem of offshore tax evasion and
avoidance and stashing of unaccounted money abroad, requiring
cooperation amongst tax authorities. The G20 and OECD
countries have together developed a Common Reporting
Standard (CRS) on Automatic Exchange of Information (AEOI).
All Applicants whose country of tax residence is not India shall
fill in the prescribed FATCA & CRS Form.
The Scheme/Plan applications, where FACTA/CRS
declaration is not provided, shall not be accepted.
Please refer to Instructions given in the FATCA/CRS Form
before filling in the particulars and for further details relating to
FATCA/CRS, refer to AMFI India’s Circular
No.135/BP/63/2015-16 dated 18th September 2015 and SEBI
Circular Nos. CIR/MIRSD/2/2015 dated 26th August 2015 &
CIR/MIRSD/3/2015 dated 10th September 2015.
Minimum balance to be
Partial redemption (at the applicable ‘redemption price’) under
maintained and consequences of
58
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
non maintenance. a folio shall be permitted subject to the Unit Holder
maintaining a minimum investment of Rs.10,000/-. This
minimum balance value is to be reckoned at the applicable
NAV as on the date of acceptance of the redemption
application. Where, the balance amount so calculated is found
to be less than the minimum, UTI AMC may compulsorily
redeem the entire outstanding holding of the Unit Holder
without any fresh application for redemption of the balance
holding and pay the proceeds to him. UTI AMC has the
discretion to increase/relax the minimum investment amount in
future.
Special Products available As indicated in clause III (A) New Fund Offer.
Statement of Account (SoA) (a) SoA will be a valid evidence of admission of the applicant
into the scheme. However, where the units are issued subject
to realisation of cheque/ draft any issue of units to such
unitholders will be cancelled and treated having not been
issued if the cheque/draft is returned unpaid.
(b) Every unitholder will be given a folio number which will be
appearing in SoA for his initial investment. Further
investments in the same name(s) would come under the
same folio, if the folio number is indicated by the applicant
at the time of subsequent investment. The folio number is
provided for better record keeping by the unitholder as well
as by UTI AMC.
(c) The AMC shall issue to the investor whose application has
been accepted, a SoA specifying the number of units
allotted. UTI AMC shall issue a SoA within 5 business days
from the date of closure of the New Fund Offer.
(d) The AMC will issue a Consolidated Account Statement
(CAS) for each calendar month to the investor in whose
folios transactions has taken place during that month and
such statement will be issued on or before the 10th day of the
succeeding month detailing all the transactions and holding
at the end of month including transaction charges paid to the
distributor, if any, across all schemes of all mutual funds.
Further, CAS as above, will also be issued to investors
(where PAN details of 1st holder are available) every half
yearly (September/March), on or before the 10th day of
succeeding month detailing holding at the end of the sixth
month, across all schemes of all mutual funds, to all such
investors in whose folios no transactions has taken place
during that period.
The word “transaction” for the purposes of CAS would
include purchase, redemption, switch, dividend payout,
Systematic Investment Plan (SIP), Systematic Withdrawal
Plan (SWP), Systematic Transfer of Investment Plan
(STRIP), and merger, if any.
59
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
However, Folios under Micro pension arrangement shall be
exempted from the issuance of CAS.
(e) Pursuant to SEBI Circular no. CIR /MRD /DP /31/2014
dated November 12, 2014 requiring Depositories to generate
and dispatch a single consolidated account statement for
investors having mutual fund investments and holding
demat accounts, the following modifications are made to the
existing guidelines on issuance of CAS –
a. Such Investors shall receive a single Consolidated
Account Statement (CAS) from the Depository.
b. Consolidation shall be done on the basis of Permanent
Account Number (PAN). In case of multiple holding, it
shall be PAN of the first holder and pattern of holding.
c. In case an investor has multiple accounts across two
depositories, the depository with whom the Demat
account has been opened earlier will be the default
depository which will consolidate the details across
depositories and MF investments and dispatch the CAS
to the investor.
d. The CAS will be generated on monthly basis.
e. If there is any transaction in any of the Demat accounts
of the investor or in any of his mutual fund folios,
depositories shall send the CAS within ten days from the
month end. In case, there is no transaction in any of the
mutual fund folios and demat accounts, then CAS with
holding details shall be sent to the investor on half yearly
basis.
f. The dispatch of CAS by the depositories shall constitute
compliance by UTI AMC/ UTI Mutual Fund with the
requirements under Regulation 36(4) of SEBI (Mutual
Funds) Regulations, 1996.
For further details on other Folios exempted from issuance
of CAS, PAN related matters of CAS etc, please refer to
SAI.
(f) For those unit holders who have provided an e-mail
address/mobile number:-
The AMC shall continue to allot the units to the unit holders
whose application has been accepted and also send
confirmation specifying the number of units allotted to the
unit holders by way of e-mail and/or SMS to the unit
holder’s registered e-mail address and/or mobile number as
soon as possible but not later than five business days from
the date of closure of the New Fund Offer.
The unit holder will be required to download and print the
60
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
SoA/other correspondences after receiving e-mail from the
Mutual Fund. Should the Unit holder experience any
difficulty in accessing the electronically delivered SoA/other
correspondences, the Unit holder shall promptly advise the
Mutual Fund to enable the Mutual Fund to make the delivery
through alternate means. Failure to advise UTI Mutual Fund
of such difficulty within 24 hours after receiving the e-mail,
will serve as an affirmation regarding the acceptance by the
Unit holder of the SoA/other correspondences.
It is deemed that the Unit holder is aware of all securities
risks including possible third party interception of the
SoA/other correspondences and the content therein
becoming known to third parties.
Under no circumstances, including negligence of the Unit
Holder , shall the Mutual Fund or anyone involved in
creating, producing, delivering or managing the SoA of the
Unit Holder, be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental,
special or consequential damages that may result from the
use of or inability to use the service or out of the breach of
any warranty. The use and storage of any information
including, without limitation, the password, account
information, transaction activity, account balances and any
other information available on the Unit holder’s personal
computer is at risk and sole responsibility of the Unit holder.
The unitholder may request for a physical account statement
by writing/calling the AMC/R&T.
Friend in Need “Friend in Need” facility is introduced for the Individual
investors (Resident as well as Non-resident) of UTI MF under
all the Scheme/Plans, whereby there is an option to furnish the
contact details including name, address, relationship, telephone
number and email ID of any person other than the applicant/s
and nominee. This will facilitate obtaining the latest contact
details of the investors, if UTI MF is unable to establish contact
with the investors.
For further details, please refer to SAI
Dividend The dividend warrants shall be dispatched to the Unit Holders
within 30 days of the date of declaration of the dividend.
In case of funds received through Cash Payment mode, the
dividend proceeds shall be remitted only to the designated bank
account.
In case of delay in payment of dividend amount, the Asset
Management Company shall be liable to pay interest to the Unit
Holders at such rate as may be specified by SEBI for the period
of such delay (presently @ 15% per annum).
Redemption (a)The redemption or repurchase proceeds shall be dispatched to
the Unit Holders within 10 business days from the date of
redemption or repurchase.
In case of funds received through Cash Payment mode, the
61
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
redemption or repurchase proceeds shall be remitted only to
the designated bank account.
(b)In case of partial redemption or redemption under SWP the
redemption of units standing to the credit of the Unit
Holder’s account shall be considered to have been redeemed
on ‘first in first out basis’.
(c)Post completion of 58 years of age or after a period of 5 years
from the date of investment whichever is later, the Unit
Holders may opt for the following alternatives as per their
requirement:
(i) To continue in the scheme,
(ii) To switchover the redemption proceeds fully or partially
to any other scheme of UTI AMC open for purchase at
that time,
(iii) To redeem his outstanding unitholding fully or partially,
(iv) To receive a fixed amount by redemption of units at
monthly/quarterly/halfyearly/annual intervals/under the
Systematic Withdrawal Plan (SWP) as explained above.
(d)Notwithstanding the above, if bodies corporate, eligible
trusts etc. having a lien on the units as per clause mentioned
below in Transfer / Pledge / Assignment of units are wound
up, then the bodies corporate, eligible trusts etc. shall receive
the redemption proceeds in accordance with such rules and
guidelines as may be formulated by UTI AMC from time to
time.
(e)All redemption (except under SWP) will be effected on
surrender of the original SoA alongwith the redemption
request slip/composite service form or such other document/s
as may be prescribed from time to time completed in all
respects.
Exit load on death of an Unit Holder:
In the case of the death of an Unit Holder, no exit load (if
applicable) will be charged for redemption of units by the
claimant under certain circumstances and subject to fulfilling of
prescribed procedural requirements. For further details refer to
SAI.
Delay in payment of redemption / The Asset Management Company shall be liable to pay interest
repurchase proceeds to the Unit Holders at such rate as may be specified by SEBI for
the period of such delay (presently @ 15% per annum).
Transfer/Pledge/Assignment of (a)Units issued under the scheme are subject to lock-in period of
Units five years from the date of allotment. Units of the Scheme
may be transferred/pledged/assigned only after the
completion of the lock - in period as provided hereunder.
(b)Units issued under the Scheme/Plan are generally not
transferable/pledgeable/assignable.
(c) However, UTI AMC may permit transfer, pledge or lien of
units issued under the scheme in favour of persons/bodies
corporate/eligible trusts etc., in accordance with the
SAI/relative operational guidelines issued by UTI AMC from
62
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
time to time to enable them to extend loan to their
employees/employees of their associates/any group of
people. (hereinafter referred to as specified Unit Holders).
Such transfer/pledge/lien shall be deemed to be effective on
the date on which necessary mandate to that effect duly
signed by both the Unit Holder and the person concerned
was received by UTI AMC.
(d) Where units issued to the specified Unit Holders are subject
to transfer/pledge/ lien as aforesaid, the bodies corporate,
eligible trust etc. shall be permitted to enforce the lien. In the
event of enforcement of the claim to the units of the specified
Unit Holders, the bodies corporate/eligible trusts etc. shall
only have a right to the redemption proceeds of the units
standing to the credit of the Unit Holder. However, they shall
not be admitted as Unit Holders. They may be given the right
to substitute an existing individual Unit Holder by another
individual as a Unit Holder if otherwise eligible. Redemption
shall be at the prevailing redemption price determined by
UTI AMC as per Scheme Information Document.
(e) Kindly also refer to SAI for the provisions contained therein
regarding Transfer/Pledge/Assignment of Units.
Settlement of Claims Please refer to the SAI for details.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the sub clauses on
Settlement of Claims in the SAI, in the event of death of the Unit
Holder and where an eligible institution/ body corporate etc.
come to have a lien on the units, it will be eligible to receive the
redemption proceeds and not the nominee/legal heir of the
deceased Unit Holder. In the event of the eligible
institution/body corporate etc. having a lien may decide not to
redeem the units, the nominee/legal heir may claim the
redemption proceeds which may be considered by UTI AMC if
the eligible institution/body corporate concurs and the settlement
of such claim is in accordance with such rules and operational
guidelines as may be formulated for the purpose by UTI AMC.
C. PERIODIC DISCLOSURES
Net Asset Value The Mutual Fund shall declare the Net asset value separately for both
This is the value per unit of the Plans by 9 p.m. on every business day on the website of UTI
the Scheme/Plan on a Mutual Fund, www.utimf.com. and on AMFI’s web-site
particular day. You can www.amfiindia.com.
ascertain the value of your
investments by multiplying The NAV shall be calculated for all business days and published in
the NAV with your unit atleast two daily newspapers having nationwide circulation on every
balance. business day.
Monthly Portfolio The Mutual Fund shall disclose portfolio (along with ISIN) as on the
Disclosure last day of the month for all its Scheme/Plans on its website on or
before the tenth day of the succeeding month in a user-friendly and
downloadable format.
The format for monthly portfolio disclosure shall be the same as that
of half yearly portfolio disclosures.
63
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
The Mutual Fund shall also disclose additional information (such as
ratios etc) subject to compliance with the SEBI Advertisement Code.
Disclosure of Assets Under The Mutual Fund shall disclose the following on monthly basis, in the
Management prescribed format, on its website and also share the same with
Association of Mutual Funds in India (AMFI):
a) AUM from different categories of Scheme/Plans such as equity
Scheme/Plans, debt Scheme/Plans, etc.
b) Contribution to AUM from B-15 cities (i.e. other than top 15 cities
as identified by AMFI) and T-15 cities (Top 15 cities).
c) Contribution to AUM from sponsor and its associates.
d) Contribution to AUM from entities other than sponsor and its
associates.
e) Contribution to AUM from investors type (retail, corporate, etc.)
in different Scheme/Plan type (equity, debt, ETF, etc.).
In order to have a holistic picture, Mutual Fund wise and consolidated
data on the above parameters shall also be disclosed on AMFI website
in the prescribed format.
Half Yearly Disclosure : The Mutual Fund shall within one month from the close of each half
Portfolio / Financial year, (i.e. 31st March and 30th September), host a soft copy of its
Results unaudited financial results on its website.
The Mutual Fund shall publish an advertisement disclosing the hosting
of such financial results on the website, in atleast two newspaper one
national English daily newspaper having nationwide circulation and
one in a newspaper having wide circulation published in the language
of the region where the Head Office of UTI MF is situated.
The Mutual Fund shall also, within one month from the close of each
half year, (i.e. 31st March and 30th September), publish by way of an
advertisement a complete statement of its Scheme/Plan portfolio in
one English daily circulating in the whole of India and in a newspaper
published in the language of the region where the head office of UTI
MF is situated.
Additional Disclosure : The Mutual Fund shall, in addition to the total commission and
expenses paid to distributors, make additional disclosures regarding
distributor-wise gross inflows, net inflows, AAUM and ratio of AUM
to gross inflows on its website on an yearly basis.
In case, the data mentioned above suggests that a distributor has an
excessive portfolio turnover ratio, i.e., more than two times the
industry average, the AMC shall conduct additional due-diligence of
such distributors.
The Mutual Fund shall also submit the data to AMFI and the
consolidated data in this regard shall be disclosed on AMFI website.
64
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Annual Report An abridged annual report in respect of the Scheme/Plan shall be mailed
to the Unit Holders not later than four months from the date of closure of
the relevant accounting year and the full annual report shall be made
available for inspection at UTI Tower, Gn Block, Bandra-Kurla
Complex, Bandra (East), Mumbai – 400 051. A copy of the full annual
report shall also be made available to the Unit Holders on request on
payment of nominal fee, if any.
Disclosures of Votes Cast by a. The AMC shall record and disclose in the prescribed format
the Mutual Funds specific rationale supporting its voting decision (for, against or
abstain) with respect to each vote proposal (SEBI Circular
SEBI/IMD/CIR No 18 / 198647 /2010 dated March 15, 2010).
b. The AMC shall additionally publish in the prescribed format
summary of the votes cast across all its investee company and its
break-up in terms of total number of votes cast in favor, against or
abstained from.
a. AMCs shall disclose votes cast on their website on a quarterly
basis, within 10 working days from the end of the quarter. The
AMC shall continue to disclose voting details in their annual
report.
Associate Transactions Please refer to Statement of Additional Information (SAI).
Taxation
The information is provided for general information only and is based on the position provided in the
Finance Act 2015. In view of the individual nature of the implications, each investor is advised to
consult his or her own tax/legal advisors with respect to the specific amount of tax and other
implications arising out of his or her participation in the Scheme/Plans.
For further details on taxation please refer to the clause on Taxation in the SAI.
65
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Mutual Fund UTI Mutual Fund is a Mutual Fund registered with SEBI and as such
is eligible for benefits under section 10 (23D) of the Income Tax Act,
1961 (the Act) to have its entire income exempt from income tax. The
Mutual Fund will receive income without any deduction of tax at
source under the provisions of Section 196(iv) of the Act.
As per the section 10(35) of the Act, dividend received by investors
under the Scheme/Plans of UTI MF is exempt from income tax in the
hands of the recipient unit holders.
Tax on Dividend and Dividend distributed under all equity schemes/plans are not subject to
Dividend Distribution Dividend Distribution Tax.
As per section 115R of the Act, the dividend distribution tax is
a) 25% plus surcharge on distribution made to any person being an
individual or a HUF,
b) 30% plus surcharge on income distributed to any other person.
However, w.e.f. 01st June 2013, where any income is distributed by a
mutual fund under an infrastructure debt fund Scheme/Plan (as
defined) to a non-resident (not being a company) or a foreign
company, the mutual fund shall be liable to pay additional income-tax
at the rate of five per cent on income so distributed.
The rate of surcharge on income distribution tax is increased from
10% to 12% w.e.f. 01st April 2015.
As per the Finance (No.2) Act 2014, with effect from 01st October
2014, for determining the dividend distribution tax payable, the
amount of distributed income be increased to such amount as would,
after reduction of the dividend distribution tax from such increased
amount, be equal to the income distributed by the Mutual Fund
(dividend distribution tax will be payable after grossing up).
Education cess @ 2% and secondary and higher education cess @ 1%
would also be charged on amount of tax plus surcharge.
Capital Gains
For other than equity
oriented Scheme/Plans:
Long Term Capital Gains Resident Investors:
As per the Finance Act 2014, with effect from 11th July 2014, for
other than equity oriented Scheme/Plans, long term capital gains
arising on redemption of units by residents is subject to treatment
indicated under Section 48 and 112 of the Act. Long term capital
gains in respect of units held for more than 36 months is chargeable to
tax @ 20% after factoring the benefit of cost inflation index. The said
tax rate is to be increased by surcharge, if applicable.
Short Term Capital Gains Units held for not more than thirty six months preceding the date of
their transfer are short term capital assets. Capital gains arising from
the transfer of short term capital assets for other than equity
Scheme/Plans will be subject to tax at the normal rates of tax
applicable to such assessee.
66
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Capital Gains:
For equity oriented
Scheme/Plans:
Long Term Capital Gains Units held for more than twelve months preceding the date of their
transfer are long term capital asset.
As per section 10(38) of the Act, any income arising from the transfer
of a long term capital asset being a unit of an Equity Oriented
Scheme/Plan chargeable to securities transaction tax (STT) shall not
form part of total income, therefore, exempt from Income Tax. As per
section 10(38) of the Act, equity oriented fund means a fund where
the investible funds are invested by way of equity share in domestic
companies to the extent of more than sixty five percent of the total
proceeds of such fund and which has been set up under a Scheme/Plan
of a mutual fund specified under section 10(23D) of the Act.
Short term capital gains Units held for not more than twelve months preceding the date of their
transfer are short term capital asset. Capital gains arising from the
transfer of short term capital assets being unit of an equity oriented
Scheme/Plan which is chargeable to STT is liable to income tax @
15% under section 111 A and section 115 AD of the Act. The said tax
rate is increased by surcharge, if applicable.
Securities Transaction Tax Transactions in units of Equity oriented Scheme/Plan also attract
securities transaction tax (STT) at applicable rates
Tax benefit under section The AMC shall apply to Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT),
80 C Ministry of Finance for approval of UTI RBP – Wealth Maximiser and
UTI RBP – Income Generator Scheme/Plan as a Notified Pension
Fund under Section 80C(2)(xiv) of the Income tax Act,1961.
Once approved by CBDT, upon investing in any of the Scheme/Plans
mentioned above, the investor will be eligible to claim deduction from
Gross Total Income up to Rs. 150000/- in a Financial year (alongwith
other prescribed investments) under section 80C of the Income Tax
Act, 1961.
Eligible for income tax benefit under section 80 C of the Income Tax
Act 1961, subject to a maximum of Rs.1,50,000/- in a financial year,
as specified therein.
Under section 80CCE of the Act, the aggregate amount of deductions
under section 80C, section 80CCC and sub-section (1) of section
80CCD shall not exceed Rs.1,50,000/- for a financial year.
67
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Investor services All investors could refer their grievances giving full particulars of
investment at the following address:
Shri G S Arora
Vice President – Department of Operations
UTI AMC Ltd.
UTI Tower, Gn Block, Bandra - Kurla Complex, Bandra (East)
Mumbai - 400 051.
Tel : 6678 6666, Fax : 2652 3031
Investors may post their grievances at our website: www.utimf.com or
e-mail us at service@uti.co.in
D. COMPUTATION OF NAV
(a) The Net Asset Value (NAV) of the Scheme/Plan shall be calculated by determining the value of the Plan’s
assets and subtracting there from the liabilities of the Plan taking into consideration the accruals and
provisions.
(b) The NAV per unit shall be calculated by dividing the NAV of the Plan by the total number of units issued
and outstanding on the valuation day. The NAV will be rounded off to 4 decimals and Units will be
allotted upto four decimal places as follows or such other formula as may be prescribed by SEBI from
time to time. NAV shall be declared separately for both the Plans.
NAV of the Units under the Plan shall be calculated as shown below:-
Market or Fair Value of Plan’s investments + Current Assets - Current Liabilities and Provision
NAV = --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
No of Units outstanding under Plan on the Valuation Date
(c) A valuation day is a day other than (i) Saturday and Sunday (ii) a day on which both the stock exchanges
(BSE and NSE) and the banks in Mumbai are closed (iii) A day on which the purchase and redemption of
units is suspended. If any business day in UTI AMC, Mumbai is not a valuation day as defined above then
the NAV will be calculated on the next valuation day and the same will be applicable for the previous
business day’s transactions including all intervening holidays.
(d) The NAVs shall be published atleast in two daily newspapers having nationwide circulation on every
business day and will also be available by 9 p.m. on every business day on website of UTI Mutual Fund,
www.utimf.com and website of AMFI namely www. amfiindia.com.
IV. FEES AND EXPENSES
This section outlines the expenses that will be charged to the Scheme/Plan.
A. ANNUAL SCHEME/PLAN RECURRING EXPENSES:
(1) These are the fees and expenses for operating the Scheme/Plan. These expenses include Investment
Management and Advisory Fee charged by the AMC, Registrar and Transfer Agents’ fee, marketing and
selling costs etc. as given in the table below:
The AMC has estimated that upto 2.50% in case of Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan and upto 2.25% in
case of Income Generator Scheme/Plan of the daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan will be charged to the
Scheme/Plan as expenses. For the actual current expenses being charged, the investor should refer to the
website of UTI Mutual Fund.
68
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
% of Daily Net Assets
Particulars Wealth Income
Maximiser Generator
Scheme/Plan Scheme/Plan
Investment Management and Advisory Fees
Trustee Fee
Audit Fees
Custodian Fees
RTA Fees
Marketing and Selling expense including agent
commission
Cost related to investor communications
Cost of fund transfer from location to location
Cost of providing account statements and dividend
redemption cheques and warrants Upto 2.50% Upto 2.25%
Costs of statutory Advertisements
Cost towards investor education and awareness (at
least 2 bps)
Brokerage and transaction cost over and above 12
bps and 5 bps for cash and derivative market trades
resp.
Service tax on expenses other than investment and
advisory fees
Service tax on brokerage and transaction cost
Other Expenses
Maximum total expense ratio (TER) permissible
Upto 2.50% Upto 2.25%
under Regulations 52 (6) (c)
Additional expenses under regulation 52(6A) (c) Upto 0.20% Upto 0.20%
Additional expenses for gross new inflows from
Upto 0.30% Upto 0.30%
specified cities under Regulation 52(6A)(b)
Note: Direct Sub Plan (investment not routed through a distributor) shall have a lower expense ratio
excluding distribution expenses, commission etc. and no commission shall be paid from such Plan. Portfolio
of the Scheme/Plan under the Existing Plan and Direct Sub Plan will be common.
Atleast 5% of the TER is charged towards distribution expenses/commission in the Regular Plan. The TER
of the Direct Plan will be lower to the extent of the above mentioned distribution expenses/commission
(atleast 5%) which is charged in the Regular Plan. For example in the event the TER of the Regular Plan is
1% p.a, the TER of the Direct Plan would not exceed 0.95% p.a.
The purpose of the table is to assist the investor in understanding the various costs and expenses that an
investor in the Scheme/Plan will bear directly or indirectly. These estimates have been made in good faith as
per the information available to the Investment Manager based on past experience and are subject to change
inter-se. Types of expenses charged shall be as per the SEBI (MFs) Regulations.
(2) The total annual recurring expenses under regulation 52(6) excluding redemption expenses but including
the investment management and advisory fees shall be subject to the following limits:
UTI RBP - Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan
On the first Rs. 100 crores of the daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan - 2.50%
On the next Rs. 300 crores of the daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan - 2.25%
69
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
On the next Rs. 300 crores of the daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan - 2.00%
On the balance of the assets of the Scheme/Plan - 1.75%
UTI RBP - Income Generator Scheme/Plan
On the first Rs. 100 crores of the daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan - 2.25%
On the next Rs. 300 crores of the daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan - 2.00%
On the next Rs. 300 crores of the daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan – 1.75%
On the balance of the assets of the Scheme/Plan - 1.50%
(3) Total Expense Ratio (TER) and Additional Total Expenses:
(i) Charging of additional expenses based on new inflows from beyond 15 cities
1. Additional TER shall be charged upto 30 bps on daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan if the new inflows
from beyond top 15 cities (as per SEBI Regulations/Circulars/AMFI data) are at least (a) 30% of gross
new inflows in the Scheme/Plan or (b) 15% of the Average Assets under Management (AAUM) (year to
date) of the Scheme/Plan, whichever is higher. The additional TER on account of inflows from beyond top
15 cities so charged shall be clawed back in case the same is redeemed within a period of 1 year from the
date of investment. The same can be used only for distribution expenses on account of new inflows from
beyond top 15 cities.
2. In case inflows from beyond top 15 cities is less than the higher of (a) or (b) above, additional TER on
daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan shall be charged as follows:
Daily net assets X 30 basis points X New inflows from beyond top 15 cities
___________________________________________________________
365* X Higher of (a) or (b) above
* 366, wherever applicable.
3. Additional expenses, not exceeding 0.20 per cent of daily net assets of the Scheme/Plan, shall be charged
towards Investment Management and Advisory fees charged by the AMC (‘AMC fees’) and for recurring
expenses (like custodian fees, audit fees, expenses for Registrars services etc) charged under different
heads as mentioned under SEBI Regulations.
4. The ‘AMC fees’ charged to the respective Scheme/Plan(s) with no sub-limits will be within the TER as
prescribed by SEBI Regulations.
5. In addition to the limits indicated above, brokerage and transaction costs not exceeding
1. 0.12 % in case of cash market transactions, and
2. 0.05 % in case of derivatives transactions
shall also be charged to the Scheme/Plans/plans. Aforesaid brokerage and transaction costs are included in
the cost of investment which are incurred for the purpose of execution of trade. Any payment towards
brokerage and transaction cost, over and above the aforesaid brokerage and transaction costs shall be
charged to the Scheme/Plans/plans within the maximum limit of TER as prescribed under regulation 52 of
the SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996. Any expenditure in excess of the said prescribed limit
(including brokerage and transaction cost, if any) shall be borne by the AMC or by the Trustee or
Sponsors
6. For further details on TER, please refer to SAI.
70
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(ii) Service Tax
1. UTI AMC shall charge service tax on investment and advisory fees to the Scheme/Plan in addition to the
maximum limit of TER.
2. Service Tax on other than investment and advisory fees, if any, shall be borne by the Scheme/Plan within
the maximum limit of TER.
3. Service Tax on entry/exit load, if any, shall be paid out of the load proceeds. Exit load, net of service tax,
if any, shall be credited to the Scheme/Plan.
4. Service Tax on brokerage and transaction cost paid for asset purchases, if any, shall be within the limit
prescribed under SEBI Regulations.
(iii) Investor Education and Awareness
UTI Mutual Fund (UTI MF) shall annually set apart atleast 2 bps on daily net assets within the maximum
limit of TER for investor education and awareness initiatives.
B. LOAD STRUCTURE
(1) Exit Load is an amount which is paid by the investor to redeem the units from the Scheme/Plan. This
amount is used by the AMC to pay commissions to the distributor and to take care of other marketing
and selling expenses. Load amounts are variable and are subject to change from time to time. For the
current applicable structure, please refer to the website of the AMC www.utimf.com or call at 1800 22
1230 (toll free number) or (022) 2654 6200 (non toll free number) or your distributor.
Entry and Exit Load
Entry Load: Not Applicable as per SEBI guidelines.
Exit Load: 1% if redeemed/switched out from UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth
Maximiser Scheme/Plan or Income Generator Scheme/Plan before attainment of 58 years of age.
Nil in case of SWP / Redemption / Switch out/ from UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund–Wealth
Maximiser Scheme/Plan or Income Generator Scheme/Plan on or after attainment of 58 years of age
or after completion of 5 year lock in period, whichever is later.
The above load structure will also be applicable for investment through Systematic Investment Plan
(SIP) and Systematic Transfer Investment Plan (STRIP).
The investor is requested to check the prevailing load structure of the UTI Retirement Benefit
Pension Fund - Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan & UTI Retirement Benefit Pension Fund -
Income Generator Scheme/Plan before investing.
For any change in load structure, AMC will issue an addendum and display it on the website/UTI
Financial Centres.
(2) Transaction charges
Pursuant to SEBI circular no. CIR/IMD/DF/13/2011 dated August 22, 2011, a transaction charge of
Rs.100/- for existing investors and Rs.150/- in the case of first time investor in Mutual Funds, per
subscription of Rs.10,000/- and above, respectively, is to be paid to the distributors of UTI Mutual Fund
products. However, there shall be no transaction charges on direct investment/s not made through the
distributor/financial advisor etc.
There shall be no transaction charge on subscription below Rs.10,000/-.
71
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
In case of SIPs, the transaction charge shall be applicable only if the total commitment through SIPs
amounts to Rs.10,000/- and above. In such cases, the transaction charge shall be recovered in 3-4
installments.
The transaction charge, if any, shall be deducted by UTI AMC from the subscription amount and paid to
the distributor and the balance shall be invested. Allocation of Units under the Scheme/Plan will be Net
of Transaction Charges. The Statement of Account (SoA) would also reflect the same.
If the investor has not ticked in the Application form whether he/she is an existing/new investor, then
by default, the investor will be treated as an existing investor and transaction charges of Rs.100/- will
be deducted for investments of Rs.10,000/- and above and paid to distributor/financial advisor etc.,
whose information is provided by the investor in the Application form. However, where the investor
has mentioned ‘Direct Sub Plan’ against the Scheme/Plan name, the Distributor code will be ignored
and the Application will be processed under ‘Direct Sub Plan’ in which case no transaction charges will
be paid to the distributor.
Opt in/Opt out by Distributors:
Distributors shall be able to choose to opt out of charging the transaction charge. However the ‘opt out’
shall be at distributor level and not at investor level i.e., a distributor shall not charge one investor and
choose not to charge another investor.
Distributors shall also have the option to either opt in or opt out of levying transaction charge based on
category of the product. The various category of product are as given below:
Sr. No. Category of product
1 Liquid/ Money Market Scheme/Plans
2 Gilt Scheme/Plans
3 Debt Scheme/Plans
4 Infrastructure Debt Fund Scheme/Plans
5 Equity Linked Saving Scheme/Plans (ELSS)
6 Other Equity Scheme/Plans
7 Balanced Scheme/Plans
8 Gold Exchange Traded Funds
9 Other Exchange Traded Funds
10 Fund of Funds investing Overseas
11 Fund of Funds – Domestic
Where a distributor does not exercise the option, the default Option will be Opt–out for all above
categories of product. The option exercised for a particular product category will be valid across all
Mutual Funds.
The ARN holders, if they so desire, can change their option during the special two half yearly windows
available viz. March 1st to March 25th and September 1st to September 25th and the new option status
change will be applicable from the immediately succeeding month.
Upfront commission, if any, on investment made by the investor, shall be paid directly by the investor to
the AMFI registered Distributors based on the investors’ assessment of various factors including the
service rendered by the distributor.
(3) Any imposition or enhancement of exit load shall be applicable on prospective investments only. The
AMC shall not charge any load on issue of bonus units and units allotted on reinvestment of dividend for
existing as well as prospective investors.
72
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
At the time of changing the load structure, the Mutual Fund shall consider the following measures to
avoid complaints from investors about investment in the Scheme/Plan without knowing the exit load:
(i) The addendum detailing the changes shall be attached to the Scheme/Plan information documents
and key information memoranda. The addendum shall be circulated to all the distributors/brokers so
that the same can be attached to all Scheme/Plan information documents and key information
memoranda already in stock.
(ii) Arrangements shall be made to display the addendum in the Scheme/Plan information document in
the form of a notice in all the official points of acceptance and distributors/brokers office.
(iii) The introduction of the exit load along with the details may be stamped in the acknowledgement slip
issued to the investors on submission of the application form and shall also be disclosed in the
statement of accounts issued after the introduction of such load.
(iv) A public notice shall be given in respect of such changes in one English daily newspaper having
nationwide circulation as well as in a newspaper published in the language of the region where the
Head Office of the Mutual Fund is situated.
(v) Any other measures which the Mutual Fund may feel necessary.
V. RIGHTS OF UNIT HOLDERS
Please refer to SAI for details.
VI. PENALTIES, PENDING LITIGATION OR PROCEEDINGS, FINDINGS OF INSPECTIONS OR
INVESTIGATIONS FOR WHICH ACTION MAY HAVE BEEN TAKEN OR IS IN THE
PROCESS OF BEING TAKEN BY ANY REGULATORY AUTHORITY
Status of the information in this regard as furnished by the respective sponsors mentioned below
is provided as under:
1. In case of Indian Sponsor(s), details of all monetary penalties imposed and/ or action taken during the
last three years or pending with any financial regulatory body or governmental authority, against
Sponsor(s) and/ or the AMC and/ or the Board of Trustees/Trustee Company; for irregularities or for
violations in the financial services sector, or for defaults with respect to share holders or debenture
holders and depositors, or for economic offences, or for violation of securities law. Details of settlement,
if any, arrived at with the aforesaid authorities during the last three years shall also be disclosed.
(a) Penalties imposed against Life Insurance Corporation of India (Amount in Rs.):-
Penalties imposed by IRDA
A. The following penalties were imposed by IRDA against LIC for the year 2014-15 on its
Inspection as per the following details:-
Particulars of Inspection observations Penalty levied by Status of payment
IRDA-Amount of penalty
• Instances were noticed wherein filled in Penalty of Rs 5 Lacs Paid
proposal forms were altered without under S.102(b) of the
Act imposed
necessary authentication from the
proposers
• Policies issued with terms and conditions
other than as applied by the Proposers
• Policies are split and more than one policy
issued under a single proposal
All equity investment in a single Investee Penalty of Rs 5 lacs Paid
73
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
company (from all funds of the corporation) imposed on the Insurer
cannot be more than 10% of outstanding shares under S.102(b) of the
(face value) of the Investee company Act
B. Service Tax
Financial Year Particulars Amount Status
2010-2011 Service Tax 1018.00 Paid
2011-2012 Service Tax 14986.00 Paid
2012-2013 Service Tax 799268.00 Paid
No penalties have been imposed during the last three years by the Income Tax Authorities.
(b) Penalties and Proceedings against Bank of Baroda:-
Zone: Maharashtra & Goa
(i) Sponsor and Branch: Bank of Baroda, Laxmi Road, Pune City
Name of Complainant: Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC)
Court/Tribunal / Case No. & Year: Supreme court SLP (C) No. 23299/2010
Amount involved: Octroi penalty of Rs. 94.22 lacs
Nature of Case/Type of offence & section: Bank filed a writ petition before Bombay HC challenging
the arbitrary demand of the PMC & the provisions under Pune Municipal Corporation (Octroi) Rules
2008 imposing penalty being contrary to the provisions of Section 398 of the Bombay Provincial
Municipal Corporation Act, 1949. The Bombay HC allowed the appeal holding corporation does not
have power to impose penalty equivalent to 10 times the Octroi without following the due process of
law as envisaged under section 398 of Act of 1949.
Bank’s reply/defence: Bank paid the amount of octroi of Rs.9,42,200/- but refused to pay penalty
amounting to Rs.94,22,000/- (10 times of octroi amount).
Present Status & Remarks: Against the order of the HC, PMC filed SLP in SC. The Hon’ble SC after
hearing the Counsels was of the view that there is conflicting judgments on the issue and the same
requires some time for hearing. On 13/10/2011 the Hon’ble SC said since bank has already paid the
Octroi and matter involved herein is only about penalty imposed by corporation, let the matter come up
for hearing in regular course. Matter has not come in the regular board till date.
(ii) Sponsor and Branch: Bank of Baroda, Nasik City
Name of Complainant: Nasik Municipal Corporation
Court/Tribunal / Case No. & Year: Supreme Court SLP (C) No. 9706/2010
Amount involved: Octroi penalty of Rs.5.95 lacs
Nature of Case/Type of offence & section: Bank filed a writ petition before Bombay HC challenging
the arbitrary demand of the NMC & the provisions under Nashik Municipal Corporation (Octroi) Rule
2005 imposing penalty being contrary to the provisions of Section 398 of the Bombay Provincial
Municipal Corporation Act, 1949. The Bombay HC allowed the appeal holding corporation does not
have power to impose penalty equivalent to 10 times the Octroi without following the due process of
law as envisaged under section 398 of Act of 1949.
74
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Bank’s reply/defence: Bank paid the amount of octroi, but refused to pay penalty amounting to
Rs. 59.50 lacs (10 times of Octroi amount).
Present Status & Remarks: Against the order of the HC, NMC filed SLP in SC. The Hon’ble SC after
hearing the Counsels was of the view that there is conflicting judgments on the issue and the same
requires some time for hearing. On 13/10/2011 the Hon’ble SC said since bank has already paid the
Octroi and matter involved herein is only about penalty imposed by corporation, let the matter come up
for hearing in regular course. Matter has not come in the regular board till date.
Total no. of cases: 2
Total amount involved/claimed amount: Rs. 100.17 lacs
Region-DMR-1 (NZ):
(iii) Sponsor and Branch: Bank of Baroda, IBB branch
Name of the party/complainant: Special Directorate of Enforcement
Name of the Court/Forum & Case no.: CRL Appeal No. 256/2009 before HC, Delhi in Comp/ u/s
8(1), 64(2) and also read with sections 6(4), 6(5), 49 and 73(3) of FERA, 1973.
Amount involved: Rs.10 lacs
Advocate Name: Pramod Agarwala
Nature of the case/type of offences and Section: Complaint u/s 6(4), 6(5), 8(1), 64(2) and 73(3) of
FERA Act 1973.
Details/brief nature of the case: Allegations of violation of FERA regarding Deposit of Foreign
Currency Notes in NRE A/c of Mr. Gurcharan Singh Sethi and Smt. Surinder Kaur. The Directorate of
Enforcement in order dated 11.08.04 held that Bank has failed to ensure the genuineness of the
transactions and has contravened the provisions of FERA. Penalty of Rs. 10 lacs was imposed. Bank
has denied the allegations on the ground that individual transactions were of less than Rs. 10 lacs.
Bank’s Reply/defence: Bank’s contention is that each time deposits are made of the amount of less
than 10000 USD, hence there is no violation of provisions of FERA Act, 1973.
Present Status and remarks: On 03.03.2010 interim stay orders have been made absolute. Matter will
be listed in due course in regular matters.
(iv) Sponsor and Branch: Bank of Baroda, IBB branch
Name of the party/complainant: Special Directorate of Enforcement
Name of the Court/Forum & Case no.: CRL Appeal No. 325/2008 before HC Delhi in Comp/ u/s 8(1),
64(2) and also read with sections 6(4), 6(5), 49 and 73(3) of FERA, 1973.
Amount involved: Rs.5 lacs
Advocate Name: Pramod Agarwala
Nature of the case/type of offences and Section: Complaint u/s 6(4), 6(5), 8(1), 64(2) and 73(3) of
FERA Act 1973.
75
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Details/brief nature of the case: Allegations of violation of FERA regarding Deposit of Foreign
Currency Notes in NRE A/c of one Mr. Sarbir Singh, from 25.01.92 to 31.01.92. The Directorate
Enforcement in order dated 11.08.04 held that Bank has failed to ensure the genuineness of the
transactions and has contravened the provisions of FERA. Penalty of Rs. 5 lacs was imposed. Appeal
filed with Appellate Authority, which has been dismissed on 07.12.2007. Criminal Appeal before the
Delhi High Court has been filed, which is pending.
Bank’s Reply/defense: Bank’s contention is that each time deposits are made of the amount of less
than 10000 USD, hence there is no violation of provisions of FERA Act, 1973.
Present Status and remarks: On 03.03.2010 interim stay orders have been made absolute. Matter will
be listed in due course in regular matters.
Total No. of Cases: 2
Total amount involved: Rs. 15 lacs
(v) Sponsor and Branch: Bank of Baroda, Eastern Zone, Camac Street
Name of the party: Special Director of Enforcement Directorate
Court/Tribunal & Case no./Year: Enforcement Directorate
Amount involved/claimed: Rs. 10 Lacs
Nature of the case/type of offences and Section: Breach of provisions of FERA
Details/brief nature of the case: Bank had given loan of Rs. 2.55 crores to M/s Corpus Credit &
Leasing Ltd., against FCNR FDR of $1 million (US) belonging to Mrs. And Mr. Bhagwandas &
Devbala Pawani held with Camac Street Branch. The then Chief Manager procured the said FDR of
Pawanis from their International Branch and handed over the same to borrower. Investigations
conducted under provisions of FERA revealed that the signatures of Mrs. and Mr. Pawani on the
account opening form did not match with those on the consent letter, discharged FCNR FDR. Chief
Manager had not verified the genuineness of the documents collected from Notice No. 4 either from
the Pawanis or from International Branch, Bank of Baroda, Dubai.
Bank’s Reply/defence: Bank followed all the directions of RBI and remittance of $ 1 million (US)
was received by Bank through authorized banking channel and was genuine. Further, the proceeds of
the FCNR FDR, along with interest thereon, was paid by the Bank to the Pawanis on maturity, in
accordance with established remittance. Hence, there was no violation of FERA. The loan granted to
the borrower company M/s Corpus Credit & Leasing Ltd. was a rupee loan and involved no outgo of
foreign exchange.
Present Status and remarks: Special Director has imposed a penalty of Rs. 10,00,000 (Rupees Ten
Lakhs) on the Bank for violation of FERA. Bank filed an appeal against the same before the
Appellate Authority for Foreign Exchange, Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs. LDH
6.03.2014 no hearing took place as opposite party did not appear. NDH 17.07.2014.
Region – Bihar, Patna
Zone – Bihar, Jharkhand & Orissa, Patna:
(vi) Sponsor and Branch: Bank of Baroda, Patna Main branch
Name of the party/Litigant/Complainant: Assessing Officer, Income Tax Department, Patna
76
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Court/Tribunal & Case No./Yr.: High Court, Patna. Appeal No. MA-632/2013
Amount involved/claimed: Rs. 96.96 Lacs
Nature of case/type of offence and section: TDS claim by Assessing Officer, Income Tax, Patna
Details/brief nature of case: Patna Main branch has not deducted TDS from the FDRs held in different
organisations for the F.Y. 2007-08 and 2008-09.
Bank’s reply/defence: Appeal filed by bank before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was dismissed.
Against the order of the ITAT bank has filed Misc. Appeal in the Hon’ble High Court, Patna which is
pending.
Present Status and remarks: The appeal in the High Court was last listed on 03.03.2014 for hearing.
The oral order has been passed on 03.03.2014 wherein it is directed that notify the case for admission
hearing. The matter is not listed in the cause list of the cases for hearing after 03.03.2014.
Total No. of Cases: 01
Total amount involved/claimed amount: Rs. 96.96 Lacs
(c) Penalties and Proceedings against Punjab National Bank:-
As informed by the Punjab National Bank, no penalties /strictures were imposed on the bank by
SEBI/Stock Exchange in respect of matters related to Capital Market during last three years.
(d) Penalties imposed on foreign offices and foreign subsidiaries of State Bank of India during 2013-
14
Period Name of Penalty Brief details Penalty Date of
Office/Branch/ imposed by imposed/Rupee payment
Subsidiary equivalent of penalty
April 2013 Jeddah Branch Saudi Arabia delayed submission of SAR 19,000 07.04.2013
Monetary financial statement as at (Rs.2.68 lac)
Agency the end of December
(SAMA) 2012
April 2013 Jeddah --do- Non adherence to the SAR 11,700 27.04.2013
requirement of (1.64 lacs)
incorporating National
ID/Civil Register
Number of the drawer
of the cheque in the slip
of all dishonoured
cheques
June 2013 Regional Securities delayed submission of PHP 8,561.79 24.07.2013
Representative Exchange General Information (Rs.0.39 lacs)
Office, Manila Commission Sheet and proof of
of Manila Inward Remittance (for
(SEC) Manila Representative
office
April 2013 Bank SBI Bank delayed submission of IDR 2,000,000 10.04.2013
Indonesia Indonesia Commercial Bank (Rs.0.13 lacs)
Daily Report,
December Bank SBI Bank error in reported data IDR 12.12.2013
2013 Indonesia Indonesia for calculation of 17,712,377
minimum statutory (Rs.0.87 lacs)
reserve
December Bank SBI Bank 25 forex purchase IDR 30.12.2013
77
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
2013 Indonesia Indonesia transactions done by a 250,000,000
customer were (Rs.12.23 lacs)
considered to be in
violation of Bank
Indonesia’s regulation
concerning foreign
exchange purchases
against IDR
June 2013 SBI Bank of This was due to Bank MUR 500,000 17.07.2013
Mauritius* Mauritius of Mauritius found that (Rs.9.96 lacs)
(SBIML) SBI Mauritius has
failed to comply with
the guidelines of Anti-
Money Laundering and
Combating the
Financing of Terrorism.
*Bank of Mauritius imposed a penalty of MUR 100,000/- i.e. equivalent of Rs.1.75 lacs for a violation
reported in December 2012. This was due to non-adherence of guidelines on advertisement by Bank of
Mauritius.
Penalties imposed on State Bank of India during 2013-14 on Domestic Operations
Period Name of Penalty Brief details Penalty Date of
Office/Branch imposed by imposed Payment
/ Subsidiary (Rupees in lacs)
July 2013 State Bank of Reserve Penalty under Section Rs. 300.00 lacs 15.07.2013
India Bank of India 47A (1)(c) read with
Section 46(4) of the
Banking Regulation
Act 1949, for alleged
violation of its
guidelines/statutory
provisions on issue/sale
of drafts/gold coins
against cash, non
capturing of beneficial
owner details in CBS
and non-availability of
a scenario for
generating alerts for
monitoring transactions
in accounts with high
turnover but low end
day balance.
March CAG New Income Tax Late remittance of TDS Rs.12.57 lacs 31.03.2014
2014 Delhi Branch Authorities pertaining to CAG New
Delhi branch.
FY 2013- All the Circles Reserve Reasons such as non Rs.237.06 lacs Penalties
14 of SBI: Bank of India conduct of surprise paid on
penalties verification of various
relating to the Currency Chest (CC) dates in
Agency branches, shortage in Circles of
Banking soiled note remittances SBI. (Dates
&Reconciliati and CC balance, of payment
on Department detection of mutilated/ for
counterfeit notes in penalties of
78
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
reissuable packets Rs.1.00
etc.(detailed in the lacs and
annexure) above are
furnished in
the list
annexed)
Penalties above one lac and nature of penalty thereof (Rs. in lacs)
Circle Nature of penalty Penal RBI DR
Amount Date of
Penalty
Amount
Ahmedabad Non conduct of surprise verification of CC balance 1.00 22-0ct-13
Bengal Shortage in Soiled Note Remittance and CC balance 20.00 22-0ct-13
Bhubaneshwar Shortage in Soiled Note Remittance and CC balance 2.10 27-Nov-13
Chandigarh Detection of mutilated/counterfeit notes in re-issuable 3.75 27-Sep-13
packets
New Delhi Denial of facilities/services to linked branch of other 5.00 16-Jan-14
banks
New Delhi Detection of mutilated/counterfeit notes in re-issuable 5.00 16-Jan-14
packets
New Delhi Detection of mutilated/counterfeit notes in re-issuable 4.74 11-Jul-13
packets and soiled note remittance
New Delhi Wrong reporting of Remittance to RBI (as withdrawal) 45.00 04-Jul-13
New Delhi Non conduct of surprise verification of cc balance 4.97 25-Jul-13
Hyderabad Non conduct of surprise verification of cc balance 5.00 12-Jul-13
Hyderabad Shortage in Soiled Note Remittance in CC balance 1.00 24-Jan-14
Lucknow Shortage in SNR and Currency Chest balance 2.60 16-Sep-13
Mumbai Shortage in SNR and Currency Chest balance 1.13 27-Mar-14
North East Shortage in SNR and Currency Chest balance 1.56 25-Jul-13
Patna Detection of mutilated/counterfeit notes in re-issuable 3.22 05-Jun-13
packets and Soiled note remittance
2. Details of all enforcement actions taken by SEBI in the last three years and/ or pending with SEBI for
the violation of SEBI Act, 1992 and Rules and Regulations framed there under including debarment and/
or suspension and/ or cancellation and/ or imposition of monetary penalty/adjudication/enquiry
proceedings, if any, to which the Sponsor(s) and/ or the AMC and/ or the Board of Trustees /Trustee
Company and/ or any of the directors and/ or key personnel (especially the fund managers) of the AMC
and Trustee Company were/ are a party. The details of the violation shall also be disclosed. –
Bank of Baroda
(a) Bank of Baroda was one of the bankers to the public issue of shares of Jaltarang Motels Limited
(“Jaltarang”). The issue opened for public subscription on December 21, 1995 and closed on
December 26, 1995.
The prospectus issued by the Company categorically stated that the company’s shares would be listed
on the stock exchanges at Ahmedabad and Bombay but permission for listing could be obtained only
from Ahmedabad Stock Exchange (ASE).
While ASE accorded approval on March 4, 1996, Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) rejected the request
of the company (Jaltarang) for listing of shares. However, the Bank (Bank of Baroda), on March 25,
1996 transferred a sum of Rs.38,89,218/- collected from the public, to the company’s (Jaltarang)
account.
79
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
Since BSE had refused to list the company’s shares, the public issue became void in terms of section
73 of the Companies Act necessitating refund of the application money forthwith to the applicants.
The matter came to the notice of SEBI. To protect the interest of applicants SEBI, after holding an
inquiry, by its order dated January 19, 2000 directed the bank to refund the sum of Rs.4,031,018/-
being the application money with interest at 15% from March 25, 1996 i.e. the day the bank allowed
withdrawal of the funds by Jaltarang in respect of funds collected from the public issue.
The Bank preferred an appeal before the Securities Appellate Tribunal against the aforesaid order of
SEBI. The tribunal, by its order dated July 27, 2000, rejected the appeal of the Bank. On which the
bank filed an appeal (Appeal No.2 of 2000) before the High Court, Mumbai against the said order of
the Tribunal. The High Court, Mumbai, on November 13, 2000, granted interim relief of stay of the
operation of the orders dated July 27, 2000 of the Securities Appellate Tribunal and January 19, 2000
of SEBI and has further directed that the matter be placed on the board for final hearing.
Present Status: The matter is still pending with High Court Mumbai.
There are no further communication/queries from any regulatory authority to BOBCAPS in the matter.
(b) The merchant banking division of the Bank of Baroda was the pre-issue lead manager for the public
issue of shares of Trident Steels Limited (“Trident”) in November, 1993.
SEBI issued a show cause notice dated April 29, 2004 calling upon the merchant banking division of
the Bank to show cause why action should not be taken against it for failing in its duty to exercise due
diligence in the above mentioned public issue. SEBI alleged that the merchant banking division of the
Bank did not disclose the material fact that 750,000 shares out of the pre issue capital of Trident had
been pledged by the directors and shareholders of those shares to the Industrial Finance Branch of the
Bank towards enhancement of various credit facilities extended by the Bank to Trident.
In October 1989, the directors and holders of those shares have given an undertaking that as long as
the dues of Trident to the Bank are not paid in full, they will not transfer, deal with or dispose off
equity or preference shares held by them in the company or any shares that might be acquired in
future, without prior written consent of the Bank.
BOBCAPS, in its reply to the show cause notice of SEBI, has submitted that it was the obligation of
Trident to give true disclosures and that any punitive action will lie solely against Trident Steels Ltd.,
its promoters and directors.
Present Status: There are no further communication/queries from SEBI to BOBCAPS in the matter.
The enquiry has been dropped by SEBI.
(c) The Bank of Baroda had acted as lead managers to the public issue of Kraft Industries Limited
(“Kraft”) in May 1995. It is alleged that the Managing Director and Promoter of Kraft Industries Ltd.
did not possess the qualifications as mentioned in the prospectus filed for raising the funds.
SEBI required from the Bank being merchant banker to the issue, the copies of qualification
certificates of the company’s Managing Director.
On enquiring, the Managing Director of Kraft Industries Ltd. informed the Bank of having lost the
certificates in transit. The bank has replied accordingly to SEBI.
The inquiry is still pending.
Present Status: There are no further communication/queries from SEBI to BOBCAPS in the matter.
80
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
(d) M. S .Shoes East Limited (MS Shoes) came out with a public issue of 17,584,800 zero interest
unsecured fully convertible debentures in February 1995. The Bank of Baroda was one of the Lead
Managers to the issue with responsibility for post issue management and had underwritten the issue up
to Rs.150,000,000.
After the closure of the issue, MS Shoes complained to the underwriters that some of the cheques
accompanying the application for subscription were returned unpaid resulting in the collected amount
falling short of the minimum subscription amount. Therefore MS Shoes called upon the underwriters
to discharge their underwriting liability to the extent of proportionate devolution and raised a claim on
the bank for Rs.116,665,043 towards devolution of underwriting liability.
The bank declined the claim on the ground that since the issue was declared oversubscribed by the
Registrars to the issue no liability can devolve on the Bank under its underwriting commitment.
SEBI has issued an enquiry notice dated July 20, 1995 to the bank, but closed the matter without
imposing any penalty on the bank.
Complaint was filed on behalf of MS Shoes, at Vikaspuri Police Station against SBI Capital Markets
Limited, the bank, its principal officers including the then CMD and others alleging cheating and
breach of trust. The High Court, New Delhi, by order dated December 11, 2000 ordered transfer of the
case to Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).
The investigation by the CBI is still pending.
Present Status: There are no further communication/queries from CBI or SEBI to BOBCAPS in the
matter.
The enquiry has been dropped by SEBI.
State Bank of India
Against Sponsor:
SEBI served show cause notice dated 08.11.2012 under rule 4 of the adjudication Rules for the
deficiencies observed in Debenture Trustee operations during their inspection conducted from
26.07.2010 to 30.07.2010 at State Bank of India, Mumbai Main branch. Bank has made payment of
Rs. 6.80 lacs towards the settlement charges to SEBI on 13.01.2015 for the same. The settlement order
was passed on 28.01.2015 by the Adjudicating Officer thus disposing of the said Adjudication
Proceedings pending in respect of SBI.
3. Any pending material civil or criminal litigation incidental to the business of the Mutual Fund to which
the Sponsor(s) and/ or the AMC and/ or the Board of Trustees /Trustee Company and/ or any of the
directors and/ or key personnel are a party should also be disclosed separately.
UTI AMC Ltd.
a) A writ petition has been filed by UTI Asset Management Company Ltd., UTI Mutual Fund and UTI
Trustee Company Private Ltd. challenging the order dated 06.08.2008 passed by the Central
Information Commission on the applicability of the Right to Information Act, 2005, which has been
stayed by the Honourable High Court, Bombay. The writ has been admitted and stay will continue
pending the hearing and final disposal of the petition. The matter will come up for hearing in due
course.
b) There are 11 criminal cases pending related to normal operations of the Scheme/Plans of UTI MF
such as non-transfer of units, non-receipt of unit certificates, non-receipt of redemption proceeds or
income distribution, closure of Scheme/Plan/plan. These cases are not maintainable and judging from
our experience such cases are generally dismissed by Courts or withdrawn by the complainant.
81
UTI-RBP - WMP and IGP SID
c) There are 30 cases pending at different courts related to suits/petitions filed by a) contract workmen,
b) employees association, c) employees/ex-employees etc. These cases are pending at different levels
for adjudication.
d) One Special Leave Petition has been filed by Bajaj Auto Ltd. before the Honourable Supreme Court
of India against the final judgement and order dated 09.10.2006 of the Honourable High Court of
Bombay in the matter of the winding up of UTI Growth & Value Fund- Bonus Plan with effect from
01.02.2005 in pursuance to circular dated 12.12.2003 of SEBI. The matter is admitted on 10.07.2008
and will be heard in due course.
e) One Writ Petition filed by R K Sanghi pending before High Court of Madhya Pradesh Principal Seat
at Jabalpur challenging termination of Senior Citizens Unit Plan (SCUP). We have already filed
affidavit in reply in the matter and now petition will be heard in due course.
Income Tax Related Matter
The company has filed appeals with CIT (A) in respect of Assessment Years 2009-10 & AY 2010-11
against Demand of Rs. 6.42 & Rs. 2.27 Cr respectively. The matter is pending for hearing.
The Commissioner has passed order u/s 263 for the Assessment Year 2006-07 directing the assessing
officer to do a fresh assessment in respect of Scheme/Plan expenses. The company has filed an
appeal before Hon’ble Tribunal against the order of the commissioner. Subsequently the assessing
officer has passed the reassessment order raising demand of Rs.2.39 Cr, against which based on the
stay order obtained, Company has paid Rs.1.19 Cr. The company has again filed an appeal before
CIT (A) against such order.
On all the above issues the company does not expect the demand to crytalise into liability.
UTI GETF:
The Maharashtra Sales Tax authorities have disallowed refund claim and raised tax demand under the
Maharashtra Value Added Tax Act 2002 for UTI GETF for a sum of Rs. 2,23,38,170/- plus interest
and penalty for the years 2007-08 to 2011-12. The matter is being contested, Appeals have been
filed/are being filed with the appellate authorities against the denial of the refund claim and raising of
demand.
4. Any deficiency in the systems and operations of the Sponsor and/or the AMC or the Trustee Company
which SEBI has specifically advised to be disclosed in the SID, or which has been notified by any
other regulatory agency. - NIL
The Board of Directors of UTI Trustee Co (P) Ltd vide Circular Resolution dated January 14, 2016
approved the launch of a separate Scheme(s)/Plan(s) under the umbrella, UTI-Retirement Benefit
Pension Fund namely UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Wealth Maximiser Scheme/Plan and
UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund – Income Generator Scheme/Plan and have ensured that
Scheme(s)/Plan(s) approved by them is a new product offered by UTI Mutual Fund and is not a minor
modification of the existing scheme/fund/product.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Scheme/Plan Information Document, the provisions of the
SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996 and the Guidelines there under shall be applicable.
82