Riskometer in Mutual Funds - Know Different Risk Levels
Skip to main content
Home
Learn
Watch
Calculators
search
Home
/
What is a Riskometer and what are the different levels?
What is a Riskometer and what are the different levels?
New to Mutual Funds
Benefits and Risks
1min 10 seconds read
The riskometer is a standardised risk measurement scale introduced by the
 Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) 
for Mutual Funds. All 
mutual fund scheme documents
 have to display the riskometer upfront and clearly so that investors know the risk associated with that particular fund.
The riskometer classifies risk into six distinct levels. These include Low, Low to Moderate, Moderate, Moderately High, High and Very High. Refer to the provided illustration on the left side.
Low Risk:
 The funds that fall under this category have the least risk due to their underlying securities, making them suitable for individuals seeking capital protection to some extent.
Low to Moderate Risk:
 These are for investors willing to take a bit of risk to get some returns over a medium to long time. Most ultra-short duration funds fall under this category.
Moderate Risk:
 This is ideal for investors who aim to expand their portfolio taking some risks. Most dynamic bond funds fall under this category.
Moderately High Risk:
 These funds hold a somewhat higher level of risk and might suit investors with a slightly higher risk profile. These are for investors willing to accept some uncertainty and greater volatility in exchange for the prospect of achieving higher growth or profitability.
High Risk:
 Funds in this category mainly invest in equities. They are ideal for those willing to take on high risk for prospective gains.
Very High Risk:
 They are extremely risky funds that invest in volatile stocks or overseas mutual fund units. They’re for investors who are likely to invest in high-risk, high-reward investment opportunities.
Disclaimer
Mutual Fund investments
 are subject to market risks, read all scheme related documents carefully.
Read More
I Am Ready to Invest
Related Articles
 
More details are loading
Load More
Calculators
 
More details are loading
Load More
Calculators
SIP Calculator
Goal SIP Calculator
Smart Goal Calculator
Inflation Calculator
Cost of Delay Calculator
Lumpsum Investment Calculator
Retirement Planning Calculator
Step-Up SIP Calculator
Systematic Withdrawal Plan Calculator
About Mutual Funds
Mutual Funds
Types of Mutual Funds
How to invest in Mutual Funds
Mutual Fund Returns
Systematic Investment Plans
Types of Funds
Equity Mutual Funds
ELSS Funds
Debt Mutual Funds
Index Funds
Home
About Us
Contact Us
Glossary
Schedule of Investor Awareness Programs
I Am Ready to Invest
Accessibility Statement
|
Disclaimer
|
Terms of use and Privacy notice
Copyright © 2025 AMFI All Rights Reserved
I Am Ready to Invest
Accessibility